 ANTI DUMPING COMMISSION Form B108 September 2019 Application for the publication of dumping and or countervailing duty notices   DECLARATION Form B108 Application for dumping and or countervailing duties Anti Dumping Commission Page 2 APPLICATION UNDER SECTION 269TB OF THE CUSTOMS ACT 1901 FOR THE PUBLICATION OF DUMPING AND OR COUNTERVAILING DUTY NOTICES DECLARATION I request, in accordance with section 269TB of the Customs Act 1901 the Act , that the Minister publish in respect of goods the subject of this application a dumping duty notice, or a countervailing duty notice, or a dumping and a countervailing duty notice. This application is made on behalf of the Australian industry producing like goods to the imported goods the subject of this application. The application is supported by Australian producers whose collective output comprises 25 or more of the total Australian production of the like goods and more than 50 of the total production of like goods by those Australian producers that have expressed either support for, or opposition to, this application. I believe that the information contained in this application provides reasonable grounds for the publication of the notice s requested and is complete and correct. Please note that giving false or misleading information is a serious offence. Signature Name Position Company ABN Date   IMPORTANT INFORMATION Form B108 Application for dumping and or countervailing duties Anti Dumping Commission Page 3 IMPORTANT INFORMATION Signature requirements Where the application is made By a company the application must be signed by a director, servant or agent acting with the authority of the body corporate. By a joint venture a director, employee, agent of each joint venturer must sign the application. Where a joint venturer is not a company, the principal of that joint venturer must sign the application form. On behalf of a trust a trustee of the trust must sign the application. By a sole trader the sole trader must sign the application. In any other case contact the Commission s Client support section for advice. Assistance with the application The Anti Dumping Commission has published guidelines to assist applicants with the completion of this application. Please refer to the following guidelines for additional information on completing this application Instructions and Guidelines for applicants on the application for the publication of dumping and or countervailing duty notices Instructions and Guidelines for applicants on the examination of a formally lodged application The Commission s client support section can provide information about dumping and countervailing procedures and the information required by the application form. Contact the team on Phone 13 28 46 Email clientsupport adcommission.gov.au Information is available from the Commission s website at Small and medium enterprises i.e., those with less than 200 full time staff, which are independently operated and which are not a related body corporate for the purposes of the Corporations Act 2001 , may obtain assistance, at no charge, from the International Trade Remedies Advisory ITRA Service. For more information on the ITRA Service, visit or telephone the ITRA Service Hotline on 61 2 6213 7267. Important information To initiate an investigation into dumping and or subsidisation, the Commission must comply with Australia s international obligations and statutory standards. This form provides an applicant industry with a framework to present its case and will be used by the Commission to establish whether there appear to be reasonable grounds for the publication of a dumping duty or countervailing duty notice and initiate an investigation. To assist consideration of the application it is therefore important that all relevant questions are answered and  IMPORTANT INFORMATION Form B108 Application for dumping and or countervailing duties Anti Dumping Commission Page 4 information that is reasonably available be supplied. The Commission does not require conclusive evidence to initiate an investigation, but any claims made should be reasonably based. An application will be improved by including supporting evidence and where the sources of evidence are identified. Simple assertion is inadequate to substantiate an application. To facilitate compilation and analysis, the application form is structured in 3 parts 1. Part A seeks information about the Australian industry. This data is used to evaluate industry trends and assess claims of material injury due to dumping subsidisation. Where an Australian industry comprises more than one company, each should separately prepare a response to Part A to protect commercial confidentiality. 2. Part B relates to evidence of dumping. 3. Part C is for supplementary information that may not be appropriate to all applications. However some questions in Part C may be essential for an application, for example, if action is sought against subsidisation. All questions in Parts A and B must be answered, even if the answer is Not applicable or None . Where appropriate, applicants should provide a short explanation about why the requested data is not applicable. This will avoid the need for follow up questions by the Commission. The application form does not specifically address all the information required when making a claim that the establishment of an Australian industry producing like goods has been or may be materially hindered. If you are considering making such a claim, please contact the Commission to discuss information requirements. The application form requests data over several periods P1, P2 .Pn to evaluate industry trends and to correlate injury with dumped or subsidised imports. The labels P1 Pn are used for convenience in this application form. Lodged applications should identify the period relevant to the data. This form does not specify a minimum period for data provision. However, sufficient data must be provided to substantiate the claims made. If yearly data is provided, this would typically comprise a period of at least four years for example the current financial year in addition to three prior years . Where information is supplied for a shorter period, applicants may consider the use of quarterly data. Data must also be sufficiently recent to demonstrate that the claims made are current. When an investigation is initiated, the Commisison will verify the claims made in the application. A verification visit to the Australian industry usually takes several days. Applicants should be prepared to substantiate all Australian industry financial and commercial information submitted in the application. Any worksheets used in preparing the application should therefore be retained to facilitate verification. During verification, the Commisison will examine company records and obtain copies of documents relating to the manufacture and sale of the goods.  IMPORTANT INFORMATION Form B108 Application for dumping and or countervailing duties Anti Dumping Commission Page 5 Appendices Some questions require attachments to be provided. The attachment numbering sequence should refer to the question answered. For example, question A2.2 requests a copy of an organisation chart. To facilitate reference, the chart should be labelled Attachment A2.2. If a second organisation chart is provided in response to the same question, it should be labelled Attachment A2.2.2 the first would be labelled Attachment A2.2.1 . Provision of data Industry financial data must, wherever possible, be submitted in an electronic format. The data should be submitted on a media format compatible with Microsoft Windows. Microsoft Excel, or an Excel compatible format, is required. If the data cannot be presented electronically please contact the Commission s client support section for advice. Lodgement of the application This application, together with the supporting evidence, must be lodged in the manner approved by the Commissioner under subsection 269SMS 2 of the Act. The Commissioner has approved lodgement of this application by either preferably, email, using the email address clientsupport adcommission.gov.au, or post to The Commissioner of the Anti Dumping Commission GPO Box 2013 Canberra ACT 2601, or facsimile, using the number 03 8539 2499. Public Record During an investigation all interested parties are given the opportunity to defend their interests by making a submission. The Commission maintains a public record of these submissions. The public record is available on the Commission s website at At the time of making the application both a confidential version for official use only and non confidential version public record of the application must be submitted. Please ensure each page of the application is clearly marked FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY or PUBLIC RECORD . The non confidential application should enable a reasonable understanding of the substance of the information submitted in confidence, clearly showing the reasons for seeking the publication of a dumping duty or countervailing duty notice, or, if those reasons cannot be summarised, a statement of reasons why a summary is not possible.  PART A INJURY TO AUSTRALIAN INDUSTRY Form B108 Application for dumping and or countervailing duties Anti Dumping Commission Page 6 PART A INJURY TO AN AUSTRALIAN INDUSTRY IMPORTANT All questions in Part A should be answered even if the answer is Not applicable or None . If an Australian industry comprises more than one company entity, each should separately complete Part A.  PART A INJURY TO AUSTRALIAN INDUSTRY Form B108 Application for dumping and or countervailing duties Anti Dumping Commission Page 7 A 1 Identity and communication Please nominate a person in your company for contact about the application Contact Name Company and position Address Telephone Facsimile E mail address ABN Alternative contact Name Position in company Address Telephone Facsimile E mail address If you have appointed a representative to assist with your application, provide the following details and complete Appendix A8 Representation . Name Business name Address Telephone Facsimile E mail address ABN A 2 Company information 1. State the legal name of your business and its type e.g. company, partnership, sole trader, joint venture . Please provide details of any other business names you use to manufacture produce sell the goods that are the subject of your application. 2. Provide your company s internal organisation chart. Describe the functions  PART A INJURY TO AUSTRALIAN INDUSTRY Form B108 Application for dumping and or countervailing duties Anti Dumping Commission Page 8 performed by each group within the organisation. 3. List the major shareholders of your company. Provide the shareholding percentages for joint owners and or major shareholders. 4. If your company is a subsidiary of another company list the major shareholders of that company. 5. If your parent company is a subsidiary of another company, list the major shareholders of that company. 6. Provide an outline diagram showing major associated or affiliated companies and your company s place within that structure include the ABNs of each company . 7. Are any management fees corporate allocations charged to your company by your parent or related company 8. Identify and provide details of any relationship you have with an exporter to Australia or Australian importer of the goods. 9. Provide a copy of all annual reports applicable to the data supplied in appendix A3 Sales Turnover . Any relevant brochures or pamphlets on your business activities should also be supplied. 10. Provide details of any relevant industry association. A 3 The imported and locally produced goods 1. Fully describe the imported product s the subject of your application Include physical, technical or other properties. Where the application covers a range of products, list this information for each make and model in the range. Supply technical documentation where appropriate. 2. List the tariff classification s and statistical code s of the imported goods. 3. Fully describe your product s that are like to the imported product Include physical, technical or other properties. Where the application covers a range of products, list this information for each make and model in the range. Supply technical documentation where appropriate. Indicate which of your product types or models are comparable to each of the imported product types or models. If appropriate, the comparison can be done in a table. 4. Describe the ways in which the essential characteristics of the imported goods are like to the goods produced by the Australian industry.  PART A INJURY TO AUSTRALIAN INDUSTRY Form B108 Application for dumping and or countervailing duties Anti Dumping Commission Page 9 5. What is the Australian and New Zealand Standard Industrial Classification Code ANZSIC applicable to your product. 6. Provide a summary and a diagram of your production process. 7. If your product is manufactured from both Australian and imported inputs describe the use of the imported inputs and identify that at least one substantial process of manufacture occurs in Australia for example by reference to the value added, complexity of process, or investment in capital . 8. If your product is a processed agricultural good, you may need to complete Part C 3 close processed agricultural goods . 9. Supply a list of the names and contact details of all other Australian producers of the product. 10. If different models can be established for the goods subject to the application What are the differences in physical characteristics that give rise to distinguishable and material differences in price Provide supporting documentation or analysis supporting the differences in physical characteristics that affects price comparability. Unit costs may also be used to demonstrate differences in physical characteristics where it affects price comparability. In providing the list of physical differences, identify the characteristics in order of significance. Identify key characteristics where the physical differences are significantly different and it is not meaningful to compare models with different physical characteristics. Identify the physical characteristics that can be reported in relation to sales and cost data respectively. This should be reflected in the sales data provided in appendices A4 and A6. Complete the table below having regard to the information provided above. The Commission will consider this information in establishing a model control code structure for the investigation. Category Sub category Sales Data Cost data Key category Category Sub category Sub category Mandatory Optional Mandatory Optional Yes No Category Sub category Sub category Mandatory Optional Mandatory Optional Yes No Category Sub category Sub category Mandatory Optional Mandatory Optional Yes No Category Sub category Sub category Mandatory Optional Mandatory Optional Yes No  PART A INJURY TO AUSTRALIAN INDUSTRY Form B108 Application for dumping and or countervailing duties Anti Dumping Commission Page 10 A 4 The Australian market 1. Describe the end uses of both your product and the imported goods. 2. Describe the Australian market for the Australian and imported product and the conditions of competition within the overall market. Your description could include information about sources of product demand marketing and distribution arrangements typical customers users consumers of the product the presence of market segmentation, such as geographic or product segmentation causes of demand variability, such as seasonal fluctuations, factors contributing to overall market growth or decline, government regulation, and developments in technology affecting either demand or production the way in which the imported and Australian product compete and any other factors influencing the market. 3. Identify if there are any commercially significant market substitutes for the Australian and imported product. 4. Complete appendix A1 Australian production . This data is used to support your declaration at the beginning of this application. 5. Complete appendix A2 Australian market . 6. Use the data from appendix A2 Australian market to complete this table Indexed table of sales quantities Period a Your Sales b Other Austn Sales c Total Austn Sales a b d Dumped Imports e Other Imports f Total Imports d e Total Market c f P1 100 100 100 100 100 100 100 P2 P3 P4 Pn Data index for first period commences with 100. Provide sufficient periods to substantiate your application. P1 Pn are used as labels for a generic application form. Please specify the period relevant to your application such as 200X or Q1 0X . A 5 Applicant s sales  PART A INJURY TO AUSTRALIAN INDUSTRY Form B108 Application for dumping and or countervailing duties Anti Dumping Commission Page 11 1. Complete appendix A3 sales turnover . 2. Use the data from appendix A3 sales turnover to complete these tables. Indexed table of Applicant s sales quantities Quantity P1 P2 P3 P4 Pn All products Australian market 100 Export market 100 Total 100 Like goods Australian market 100 Export market 100 Total 100 Index of data. Pn should be the most recently completed period. P1 Pn are used as labels for a generic application form. Please specify the period relevant to your application such as 200X or Q1 0X . Indexed table of Applicant s sales values Value P1 P2 P3 P4 Pn All products Australian market 100 Export market 100 Total 100 Like goods Australian market 100 Export market 100 Total 100 Index of data. Pn should be the most recently completed period. P1 Pn are used as labels for a generic application form. Please specify the period relevant to your application such as 200X or Q1 0X . 3. Complete appendix A5 sales of other production if you have made any internal transfers or domestic sales of like goods that you have not produced, for example if you have imported the product or on sold purchases from another Australian manufacturer. 4. Complete appendix A4 domestic sales . 5. If any of the customers listed at appendix A4 domestic sales are associated with your business, provide details of the association. Describe the price effect of the association.  PART A INJURY TO AUSTRALIAN INDUSTRY Form B108 Application for dumping and or countervailing duties Anti Dumping Commission Page 12 6. Attach a copy of distributor or agency agreements contracts. 7. Provide copies of any price lists. 8. If any price reductions for example commissions, discounts, rebates, allowances and credit notes have been made on your Australian sales of like goods provide a description and explain the terms and conditions that must be met by the customer to qualify. Where the reduction is not identified on the sales invoice, explain how you calculated the amounts shown in appendix A4 domestic sales . If you have issued credit notes directly or indirectly provide details if the credited amount has not been reported appendix A4 domestic sales as a discount or rebate. 9. Select two domestic sales in each quarter of the data supplied in appendix A4 domestic sales . Provide a complete set of commercial documentation for these sales. Include, for example, purchase order, order acceptance, commercial invoice, discounts or rebates applicable, credit debit notes, long or short term contract of sale, inland freight contract, and bank documentation showing proof of payment. 10. Provide a list of model control codes from appendix A4. A 6 General accounting administration information 1. Specify your accounting period. 2. Provide details of the address es where your financial records are held. 3. To the extent relevant to the application, please provide the following financial documents for the two most recently completed financial years plus any subsequent statements chart of accounts audited consolidated and unconsolidated financial statements including all footnotes and the auditor s opinion internal financial statements, income statements profit and loss reports , or management accounts, that are prepared and maintained in the normal course of business for the goods. These documents should relate to 1. the division or section s of your business responsible for the production and sale of the goods covered by the application, and 2. the company overall. 4. If your accounts are not audited, provide the unaudited financial statements for  PART A INJURY TO AUSTRALIAN INDUSTRY Form B108 Application for dumping and or countervailing duties Anti Dumping Commission Page 13 the two most recently completed financial years, together with your taxation returns. Any subsequent monthly, quarterly or half yearly statements should also be provided. 5. If your accounting practices, or aspects of your practices, differ from Australian generally accepted accounting principles, provide details. 6. Describe your accounting methodology, where applicable, for the recognition timing of income, and the impact of discounts, rebates, sales returns warranty claims and intercompany transfers provisions for bad or doubtful debts the accounting treatment of general expenses and or interest and the extent to which these are allocated to the cost of goods costing methods eg by tonnes, units, revenue, activity, direct costs etc and allocation of costs shared with other goods or processes the method of valuation for inventories of raw material, work in process, and finished goods eg FIFO, weighted average cost valuation methods for scrap, by products, or joint products valuation methods for damaged or sub standard goods generated at the various stages of production valuation and revaluation of fixed assets average useful life for each class of production equipment, the depreciation method and depreciation rate used for each treatment of foreign exchange gains and losses arising from transactions and from the translation of balance sheet items and restructuring costs, costs of plant closure, expenses for idle equipment and or plant shut downs. 7. If the accounting methods used by your company have changed over the period covered by your application please provide an explanation of the changes, the date of change, and the reasons. A 7 Cost information 1. Complete appendices A6.1 and A6.2 cost to make and sell for domestic and export sales.  PART A INJURY TO AUSTRALIAN INDUSTRY Form B108 Application for dumping and or countervailing duties Anti Dumping Commission Page 14 2. Provide a list of model control codes from appendix A6.1 and A6.2. A 8 Injury The principal indicators of injury are price, volume and profit effects although not all of these must be evident. For this application, profit refers to amounts earned. Profitability is the ratio of profit to sales revenue. Where the application includes a claim of threat of material injury you must also complete question C.2. 1. Estimate the date when the material injury from dumped and or subsidised imports commenced. 2. Using the data from appendix A6 cost to make and sell , complete the following tables for each model control code of your production. Pn is the most recent period. Index of production variations model control code Period 1 2 3 4 n Index 100 Identify the relevant period eg 200X or Q1 0X Use data from label A of appendix A6.1 Index of cost variations model control code Period 1 2 3 4 n Index 100 Identify the relevant period eg 200X or Q1 0X use data from label J of appendix A6.1 Index of price variations model control code Period 1 2 3 4 n Index 100 Identify the relevant period eg 200X or Q1 0X Use data from label L of appendix A6.1 Index of profit variations model control code  PART A INJURY TO AUSTRALIAN INDUSTRY Form B108 Application for dumping and or countervailing duties Anti Dumping Commission Page 15 Period 1 2 3 4 n Index 100 Identify the relevant period eg 200X or Q1 0X use data from label M or N specify as appropriate of appendix 6.1 Index of profitability variations model control code Period 1 2 3 4 n Index 100 Identify the relevant period eg 200X or Q1 0X use data from label O of appendix A6.1 3. Complete appendix A7 other injury factors . Where applicable to injury claims, prepare an indexed table for other injury factor s in the format above. Index of factor Period 1 2 3 4 n Index 100 Identify the relevant period eg 200X or Q1 0X use data from appendix A7 A 9 Link between injury and dumped or subsidised imports To establish grounds to initiate an investigation there must be evidence of a causal relationship between the injury and the alleged dumping or subsidisation. This section provides for an applicant to analyse the data provided in the application to establish this link. It is not necessary that injury be shown for each economic indicator. 1. Identify from the data at appendix A2 Australian market the influence of the volume of dumped and or subsidised imports on your quarterly sales volume and market share. 2. Use the data at appendix A2 Australian market to show the influence of the price of dumped and or subsidised imports on your quarterly prices, profits and profitability provided at appendix A6.1 costs to make and sell . If appropriate,  PART A INJURY TO AUSTRALIAN INDUSTRY Form B108 Application for dumping and or countervailing duties Anti Dumping Commission Page 16 refer to any price undercutting and price depression evident in the market. 3. Compare the data at appendix A2 Australian market to identify the influence of dumped and or subsidised imports on your quarterly costs to make and sell at appendix A6.1 for example refer to changes in unit fixed costs or the ability to raise prices in response to material cost increases . 4. The quantity and prices of dumped and or subsidised imported goods may affect various economic factors relevant to an Australian industry. These include, amongst other things, the return on investment in an industry, cash flow, the number of persons employed and their wages, the ability to raise capital, and the level of investment in the industry. Describe, as appropriate, the effect of dumped and or subsidised imports on these factors and where applicable use references to the data you have provided at appendix A7 other economic factors . If factors other than those listed at appendix A7 other economic factors are relevant, include discussion of those in response to this question. 5. Describe how the injury factors caused by dumping and or subsidisation and suffered by the Australian industry are considered to be material . 6. Discuss factors other than dumped and or subsidised imports that may have caused or may threaten to cause injury to the industry. This may be relevant to the application in that an industry weakened by other events may be more susceptible to injury from dumping and subsidisation. 7. This question is not mandatory, but may support your application. Where trends are evident in your estimate of the volume and prices of dumped and or subsidised imports, forecast their impact on your industry s economic condition. Use the data at appendix A2 Australian market , appendix A6 cost to make and sell , and appendix A7 other economic factors to support your analysis.  PART B DUMPING Form B108 Application for dumping and or countervailing duties Anti Dumping Commission Page 17 PART B DUMPING IMPORTANT All questions in Part B should be answered even if the answer is Not applicable or None unless the application is for countervailing duty only refer Part C . If an Australian industry comprises more than one company entity, Part B need only be completed once.  PART B DUMPING Form B108 Application for dumping and or countervailing duties Anti Dumping Commission Page 18 B 1 Source of exports 1. Identify the country ies of export of the dumped goods. 2. Identify whether each country is also the country of origin of the imported goods. If not, provide details. 3. If the source of the exports is a non market economy, or an economy in transition refer to Part C.4 and Part C.5 of the application. 4. Where possible, provide the names, addresses and contact details of producers of the goods exported to Australia exporters to Australia and importers in Australia. 5. If the import volume from each nominated country at Appendix A.2 Australian Market does not exceed 3 of all imports of the product into Australia refer to Part C.6 of the application. 6. In the case of an application for countervailing measures against exports from a developing country, if the import volume from each nominated country at Appendix A.2 Australian Market does not exceed 4 of all imports of the product into Australia refer to Part C.6 of the application B 2 Export price Possible sources of information on export price include export price lists estimates from the Australian Bureau of Statistics a deductive export price calculation from the Australian selling price of the imported goods export sales quotations or invoices foreign government export trade clearances. 1. Indicate the FOB export price s of the imported goods. Where there are different model control codes or levels of trade involved, an export price should be supplied for each. 2. Specify the terms and conditions of the sale, where known. 3. If you consider published export prices are inadequate, or do not appropriately reflect actual prices, please calculate a deductive export price for the goods. Appendix B1 Deductive Export Price can be used to assist your estimation. 4. It is important that the application be supported by evidence to show how export price s have been calculated or estimated. The evidence should identify the source s of data.  PART B DUMPING Form B108 Application for dumping and or countervailing duties Anti Dumping Commission Page 19 B 3 Selling price normal value in the exporter s domestic market Possible sources of information about domestic selling prices in the country of export include price lists for domestic sales with information on discounts actual quotations or invoices relating to domestic sales published material providing information on the domestic selling prices or market research undertaken on behalf of the applicant. 1. State the selling price for each model control code of like goods sold by the exporter, or other sellers, on the domestic market of the country of export. 2. Specify the terms and conditions of the sale, where known. 3. Provide supporting documentary evidence. 4. List the names and contact details of other known sellers of like goods in the domestic market of the exporting country. B 4 Estimate of normal value using another method This section is not mandatory. It need only be completed where there is no reliable information available about selling prices in the exporter s domestic market. Other methods of calculating a normal value include the cost to make the exported goods plus the selling and adminstration costs as if they were sold in the exporter s domestic market plus an amount for profit if applicable OR the selling price of like goods from the country of export to a third country. 1. Indicate the normal value of the like goods in the country of export using another method if applicable, use appendix B2 Constructed Normal Value . 2. Provide supporting documentary evidence. B 5 Adjustments A fair comparison must be made between the export price and the normal value. Adjustments should be made for differences in the terms and circumstances of the sales such as the level of trade, physical characteristics, taxes or other factors that affect price comparability. 1. Provide details of any known differences between the export price and the normal value. Include supporting information, including the basis of estimates. 2. State the amount of adjustment required for each and apply the adjustments to the domestic prices to calculate normal values. Include supporting information, including the basis of estimates.  PART B DUMPING Form B108 Application for dumping and or countervailing duties Anti Dumping Commission Page 20 B 6 Dumping margin 1. Subtract the export price from the normal value for each model control code of the goods after adjusting for any differences affecting price comparability . 2. Show dumping margins as a percentage of the export price.  PART C SUPPLEMENTARY SECTION Form B108 Application for dumping and or countervailing duties Anti Dumping Commission Page 21 PART C SUPPLEMENTARY SECTION IMPORTANT Replies to questions in Part C are not mandatory in all instances, but may be mandatory for certain applications.  PART C SUPPLEMENTARY SECTION Form B108 Application for dumping and or countervailing duties Anti Dumping Commission Page 22 C 1 Subsidy This section must be completed where countervailing duties are sought to offset foreign government assistance through subsidies to exporters or producers. If the application is for countervailing duty alone, the domestic price information required by Part B of the application need not be supplied. Responses to questions A 9 will need to identify the link between subsidisation and injury. 1. Identify the subsidy paid in the country of export or origin. Provide supporting evidence including details of i the nature and title of the subsidy ii the government agency responsible for administering the subsidy iii the recipients of the subsidy and iv the amount of the subsidy. C 2. Threat of material injury You must complete this section if the application includes a claim that material injury is threatened to an Australian industry because of the exportation of goods into the Australian market. 1. Identify the change s in circumstances that would make material injury foreseeable and imminent unless dumping or countervailing measures were imposed, for example by having regard to i the rate of increase of dumped subsidised imports ii changes to the available capacity of the exporter s iii the prices of imports that will have a significant depressing or suppressing effect on domestic prices and lead to further imports iv inventories of the product to be investigated v for applications claiming subsidisation, the nature of the subsidies in question and the trade effects likely to arise therefrom or vi any other relevant factor s . 2. If appropriate, include an analysis of trends or a projection of trends and market conditions illustrating that material injury is both foreseeable and imminent. C 3. Close processed agricultural goods Where it is established that the like processed goods are closely related to the locally produced unprocessed raw agricultural goods, then for the purposes of injury assessment the producers of the raw agricultural goods form part of the Australian industry. This section is to be completed only where processed agricultural goods are the subject of the application. Applicants are advised to contact the Commission s client support section before completing this section.  PART C SUPPLEMENTARY SECTION Form B108 Application for dumping and or countervailing duties Anti Dumping Commission Page 23 1. Fully describe the locally produced raw agricultural goods. 2. Provide details showing that the raw agricultural goods are devoted substantially or completely to the processed agricultural goods. 3. Provide details showing that the processed agricultural goods are derived substantially or completely from the raw agricultural goods. 4. Provide information to establish either a close relationship between the price of the raw agricultural goods and the processed agricultural goods or that the cost of the raw agricultural goods is a significant part of the production cost of the processed agricultural goods. C 4. Exports from a non market economy Complete this section only if exports from a non market economy are covered by the application. The domestic price information required by Part B of the application need not be supplied if this question is answered. Normal values for non market economies may be established by reference to selling prices or to costs to make and sell the goods in a comparable market economy country. 1. Provide evidence the country of export is a non market economy. A non market economy exists where the government has a monopoly, or a substantial monopoly, of trade in the country of export and determines or substantially influences the domestic price of like goods in that country. 2. Nominate a comparable market economy to establish selling prices. 3. Explain the basis for selection of the comparable market economy country. 4. Indicate the selling price or the cost to make and sell for each model control code of the goods sold in the comparable market economy country. Provide supporting evidence. C 5 Exports from an economy in transition An economy in transition exists where the government of the country of export had a monopoly, or substantial monopoly, on the trade of that country such as per question C 4 and that situation no longer applies.  PART C SUPPLEMENTARY SECTION Form B108 Application for dumping and or countervailing duties Anti Dumping Commission Page 24 Complete this section only if exports from an economy in transition are covered by the application. Applicants are advised to contact the Commission s client support section before completing this section 1. Provide information establishing that the country of export is an economy in transition . 2. A price control situation exists where the price of the goods is controlled or substantially controlled by a government in the country of export. Provide evidence that a price control situation exists in the country of export in respect of like goods. 3. Provide information reasonably available to you that raw material inputs used in manufacturing producing the exported goods are supplied by an enterprise wholly owned by a government, at any level, of the country of export. 4. Estimate a normal value for the goods in the country of export for comparison with export price. Provide evidence to support your estimate. C 6 Aggregation of Volumes of dumped goods Only answer this question if required by question B 1.5 of the application and action is sought against countries that individually account for less than 3 of total imports from all countries or 4 in the case of subsidised goods from developing countries . To be included in an investigation, they must collectively account for more than 7 of the total or 9 in the case of subsidised goods from developing countries . Quantity Value All imports into Australia 100 100 Country A Country B etc Total Only include countries that account for less than 3 of all imports or 4 in the case of subsidised goods from developing countries . Use the data at Appendix A.2 Australian Market to complete the table.  PART C SUPPLEMENTARY SECTION Form B108 Application for dumping and or countervailing duties Anti Dumping Commission Page 25 APPENDICES Appendix A1 Australian Production Appendix A2 Australian Market Appendix A3 Sales Turnover Appendix A4 Domestic Sales Appendix A5 Sales of Other Production Appendix A6.1 Cost to Make and Sell profit Domestic Sales Appendix A6.2 Cost to Make and Sell profit Export Sales Appendix A7 Other Injury Factors Appendix A8 Authority to Deal With Representative Appendix B1 Deductive Export Price Appendix B2 Constructed Normal Value 