 Child Safe and Vulnerable People Policy Version 1.1 1 Child Safe and Vulnerable People Policy December 2023   Child Safe and Vulnerable People Policy Version 1.1 2 Key information Approved by General Manager, People Branch Policy owner People Branch File name DISR 02 13 00 Child Safe and Vulnerable People Policy Date of next review September 2025 Contact for enquiries WHS industry.gov.au Approval This document forms part of the department s Work Health and Safety Management System. This document has been approved following worker and stakeholder consultation. Tanja Watson General Manager, People Branch 12 December 2023 Document version history Version Date Comments 1.1 12 January 2024 Amendment to Attachment A to include updated information from the South Australian regulator. 1.0 12 December 2023 Initial release. This document supersedes the previous Working with children and vulnerable people policy. Document control This document is maintained in electronic form and is uncontrolled in printed form. It is the responsibility of the user to verify that this copy is the latest version.   Child Safe and Vulnerable People Policy Version 1.1 3 Contents 1 Purpose 4 1.1 Authority. 4 1.2 Statement of commitment to the safety and protection of children, young people and vulnerable people 4 2 Principles 4 3 Scope 5 4 Responsibilities 5 4.1 Recordkeeping 7 5 Risk management 7 6 Working safely with children, young people and vulnerable people 7 6.1 Employment requirements. 7 6.2 Professional behaviours 8 6.3 Training and supervision 8 6.4 Participation of children, young people and vulnerable people 9 6.5 Work experience students. 9 7 Reporting and complaints 9 7.1 Internal reporting 9 7.2 External reporting 10 7.3 Responding to complaints 10 7.4 Privacy 10 8 Communication 10 8.1 Staff and volunteers 10 8.2 Service providers, grants and procurement 11 8.3 Service users, parents, children, young people and vulnerable people 11 9 Definitions 12 10 Relevant departmental policies and procedures 14 11 Policy review 14 Attachment A Relevant legislation 15 12 Attachment B Code of Conduct for a Child Safe Agency 18 13 Attachment C Child Safe Professional Behaviours 20 14 Attachment D Identified child safe risks and treatment actions 21   Child Safe and Vulnerable People Policy Version 1.1 4 1 Purpose The purpose of the Child Safe and Vulnerable People Policy the policy is to demonstrate the Department of Industry, Science and Resources the department commitment to the safety and wellbeing of children, young people and vulnerable people. This policy outlines the responsibilities of all staff and volunteers in ensuring the safety and wellbeing of children, young people and vulnerable people in the course of their duties. The policy establishes the department s expectations of all staff and volunteers and provides practical guidance for embedding safe practices into the department in a comprehensive and systemic manner. 1.1 Authority This policy is a lawful and reasonable direction under the subsection 13 5 of the Public Service Act 1999. Each jurisdiction in Australia maintains its own legislation in relation to child, young person and vulnerable person safety. Information on the relevant legislation contained in Attachment A. 1.2 Statement of commitment to the safety and protection of children, young people and vulnerable people The department is committed to providing a safe environment that protects all children, young people and vulnerable people from harm or risk of harm and that upholds the rights of children, young people and vulnerable people to feel and be safe. The department does not permit or tolerate any risk of harm, harm, or forms of child abuse, neglect or exploitation. The department values and respects children, young people and vulnerable people and welcomes them regardless of their abilities, sex, gender, or social, economic or cultural background. Bullying and harassment is not tolerated. The department is committed to complying with the Commonwealth Child Safe Framework the National Principles for Child Safe Organisations, and the relevant state territory legislation as outlined in Attachment A of this policy. The department is committed to the adopting the 10 national principles of the Commonwealth Child Safe Framework through information, training and procedures that influence and contribute to an environment that supports the safety of children and young people. 2 Principles This policy is guided by the following principles Establishing clear processes to minimise the risk of harm to children, young people and vulnerable people at department sites including online and when participating in activities by providing child safe environments. Taking appropriate steps to identify all positions that involve, or are likely to involve, working with children, young people and vulnerable people. Ensuring any staff member or volunteer in a prescribed position holds a current and valid Working With Vulnerable People WWVP and or Working With Children Check WWCC . Monitoring prescribed positions to ensure the occupants hold valid WWVP WWCC.   Child Safe and Vulnerable People Policy Version 1.1 5 Not employing staff or volunteers in prescribed positions without a current and valid WWVP WWCC. Complying with legislative responsibilities to notify relevant authorities of matters relating to child safety. Where allegations of reportable conduct or safety concerns occur, these will be taken seriously and acted upon in accordance with departmental policies, procedures and relevant legislation. Providing support and information to staff and volunteers to maintain the department as a child safe environment and foster an understanding of individual and organisation obligations for child safety, protection and reporting obligations. Department staff and volunteers are expected to be active participants in maintaining a safe environment for children, young people, and vulnerable people consistent with the APS Code of Conduct, department Code of Conduct for a Child Safety Agency, Child Safe Professional Behaviours and other relevant policies. 3 Scope This policy applies to all workers engaged by the department whose duties involve, result in, or relate to contact with children, young people or vulnerable people. This includes SES, ongoing and non ongoing employees, contractors, consultants and volunteers. Workers are required to adhere to the Commonwealth Child Safe Framework, relevant state territory child safety and vulnerable people legislation, and all relevant responsibilities outlined in this policy. Service providers engaged by the department to deliver services to children, young people and vulnerable people e.g., contracted service providers, sub contractors and third party providers must have terms and conditions in their contracts and agreements pertaining to child and vulnerable people safety, must comply with these terms and conditions, and these are to be no less rigorous than this policy and must meet the requirements of the relevant legislation. 4 Responsibilities Role Responsibility Senior executives Demonstrate commitment and leadership in promoting a child safe workplace. Ensure child and vulnerable people safety is considered and included in the development of risk assessments for any work involving children, young people or vulnerable people. Consider child and vulnerable people safety when assessing grants and procurements which may involve children or vulnerable people in their delivery. Take immediate action where breaches of this policy by staff, service providers or grant recipients are alleged. People Branch Undertake regular review of this policy. Support business areas who undertake work involving children to appropriately manage risks. Work with business areas, as required, to establish an induction and training regime on child safe requirements.   Child Safe and Vulnerable People Policy Version 1.1 6 Work with business areas, as required, to implement appropriate child safe recruitment practices. Manage procedures for receiving and responding to complaints. Risk and Integrity Strategy The Risk Team is available for risk assessment guidance and support to business areas. Business areas who work directly with children e.g., Questacon and Australian Space Agency Identify positions undertaking child or vulnerable people related work. Undertake annual risk assessments to identify the level of interaction with children and manage the associated risks. Ensure staff and volunteers that undertake child or vulnerable people related work o maintain a suitable National Police Check and WWVP WWCC registrations, as appropriate to the states or territories the person will be working in. o complete relevant induction and training related to working with children and young people. Maintain a local register of WWVP WWCC registrations and the ongoing compliance of mandatory induction and training. Staff involved in designing or managing contracts or grants Ensure relevant policies and procurement or grant review papers reference compliance with the National Child Safe Framework and relevant legislation. Ensure third party providers have appropriate child safe policies and comply with their child safety and vulnerable people obligations. All managers, staff and volunteers Treat all children and vulnerable people with respect and comply with the APS Code of Conduct, department Code of Conduct for a Child Safety Agency in Attachment B and the Child Safe Professional Behaviours in Attachment C. Staff and volunteers who undertake child related work must complete induction and training on child safe behaviours and responsibilities and comply with all requirements of this policy. Comply with the applicable state, territory and Commonwealth legislation. Be aware of and comply with this policy and the National Principles for Child Safe Organisations. Appropriately report potential breaches of this policy. Where staff and volunteers are required to maintain a WWVP WWCC registration, they must comply with the appropriate legislation and this policy. Staff and volunteers must renew their WWVP WWCC registration within the required timeframe of their relevant state territory legislation. Staff and volunteers must inform the department of any change to their circumstances that would impact their eligibility for registration under WWVP WWCC.   Child Safe and Vulnerable People Policy Version 1.1 7 4.1 Recordkeeping Records provide evidence, explain action, justify decisions and demonstrate processes followed. They are an essential part of a transparent and accountable public service. Business activities related to managing activities for a person under the age of 18 need to be captured, managed and maintained in endorsed departmental information management systems such as Stratus, DocHub and Content Manager, and in accordance with guidelines defined by National Archives of Australia. Records relating to persons under the age of 18 are currently subject to a disposal freeze due to the Royal Commission into Institutional Responses to Child Sexual Abuse in Australia. For further information please contact the Information Management team via Service Now. Role Responsibility Executive and management Promote compliance with recordkeeping obligations to support this policy. Staff and volunteers Be familiar with information management policies. Understand their personal obligations and responsibilities when capturing, managing and maintaining information, especially those relating to children. Seek guidance from the Information Management Section if unsure of their obligations. Information Management Section Promote compliance with this policy. Ensure adequate guidance is produced to support staff in understanding their recordkeeping obligations. 5 Risk management The department adopts a risk management approach for business areas that undertake programs and activities that have contact with or impact children, young people and vulnerable people. Business areas are to undertake an annual divisional risk assessment in relation to their activities that involve children, young people or vulnerable people. This risk assessment is to identify the level of engagement with children, young people and vulnerable people in the department, evaluate the associated risks for harm or abuse, and establish appropriate strategies to mitigate or manage identified risks. Departmental staff must ensure child and vulnerable people safety and protection is considered when developing their own risk plans, considering physical safety and wellbeing, and managed in accordance with the department s risk management practices. Identified risks and actions to manage these can be found within Attachment D. 6 Working safely with children, young people and vulnerable people 6.1 Employment requirements To ensure we engage the most suitable people to work with children and young people, the following recruitment practices must be in place   Child Safe and Vulnerable People Policy Version 1.1 8 our commitment to child safety is included in job advertisements which involve work with or in relationship to children or young people. written applications from applicants. reference checks and qualification checks. All staff and volunteers who work with children and young people are required to have a National Police Certificate. not be a prohibited person as defined by the relevant state or territory. have current WWVP WWCC in the relevant state or territory in which they perform the activities involving children and young persons, including online or in person . provide evidence of this prior to commencing work with children. renew their WWVP WWCC in timeframes required by the relevant state or territory. advise the department of any status change of their WWVP WWCC registration. The department is registered with the applicable state and territory government screening units, as listed in Attachment A of this policy, and is to verify the accuracy of all WWVP WWCCs via the applicable state or territory screening unit. The department is to immediately contact the applicable state or territory screening unit when it becomes aware of certain information regarding any person involved with our department, including any serious criminal offence, child protection information or disciplinary or misconduct information as it may relate to children, young people or vulnerable people. Where a WWVP WWCC registration application or renewal fails, or an existing registration is cancelled, and it is a requirement for the position, the individual will be unable to continue in the role. The implications of the decision is to be assessed on a case by case basis, in consultation with People Branch, which may include termination of employment, contract or volunteer placement. 6.2 Professional behaviours All departmental staff are expected to treat all children, young people and vulnerable people with respect and act in accordance with the APS Code of Conduct and APS Values. Staff working with children, or who come in contact with children in the workplace or at a work function, must adhere to the department s Code of Conduct for a Child Safe Agency in Attachment B and the Child Safe Professional Behaviours outlined in Attachment C. Any breaches or suspected breaches of the APS Code of Conduct, department Code of Conduct for a Child Safe Agency or Child Safe Professional Behaviours must be reported as soon as possible. These matters are to be taken seriously and dealt with quickly, fairly and transparently. Any worker who is found to have breached the codes of conduct will face disciplinary action and depending on severity of the breach, the worker may have their employment terminated. 6.3 Training and supervision The department is to have strategies in place to supervise, train and support workers to understand this policy, any mandatory reporting obligations, how to build culturally safe environments and their responsibilities to create a child safe and friendly environment. This includes training modules which   Child Safe and Vulnerable People Policy Version 1.1 9 must be completed annually, regular supervision and induction processes. The training is reviewed regularly to ensure relevance, and identified staff and volunteers are required to maintain currency of their training. Managers of staff and volunteers who work with, or in relation to, children and vulnerable people must ensure staff and volunteers maintain their knowledge of child safe environments, any mandatory reporting obligations, and uphold the APS Code of Conduct, APS Values, department Code of Conduct for a Child Safe Agency and Child Safe Professional Behaviours. 6.4 Participation of children, young people and vulnerable people The department provides engaging learning experiences for children and young people. Staff working with children or vulnerable people, or in work involving children or vulnerable people, must ensure their work is undertaken in a manner which considers children and vulnerable people. The department encourages children, young people and vulnerable people to be involved in decisions where appropriate. All staff working with children and vulnerable people are to work to create safe and trustworthy spaces for children and vulnerable people to be heard and are to listen carefully and respect the voices of children and vulnerable people, including any concerns they may have, and act on these. 6.5 Work experience students From time to time the department may employ work experience students who are undertaking vocational training through their relevant education department s learning program. Child safety requirements for work experience students vary across the states and territories. Staff and volunteers engaging with children undertaking work experience may not need a WWVP WWCC. It is the responsibility of the manager overseeing the work experience to confirm and abide by any child safe requirements, including the need for a WWVP WWCC registration. Staff who are supervising work experience students are to review this policy, complete the child safe training modules on the department s intranet, abide by the APS Code of Conduct and APS values, and gain a WWCC WWVP if required. 7 Reporting and complaints 7.1 Internal reporting All staff and volunteers have a responsibility to report any suspected or alleged cases of harm, child abuse, neglect or exploitation or non compliance with this policy by any persons captured in the scope of this policy. Some staff may be considered mandatory reporters under relevant state or territory legislation. Where staff are identified as a mandatory reporter, they are required to familiarise themselves with the mandatory reporting requirements in the state or territory in which they undertake their work and comply with these legislative requirements. Section 12 of this policy has more information on mandatory reporting. All staff and volunteers who work with children and young people are required by law to report suspected child abuse and harm.   Child Safe and Vulnerable People Policy Version 1.1 10 If a staff member or volunteer has a reasonable suspicion or belief, arising from any departmental activity or program, that a child, young person or vulnerable person has been, or is being, abused or harmed by any person, they must notify the department s Case Management team via PeopleSupport industry.gov.au. It is to then be determined whether the matter needs to be referred to the relevant law enforcement agencies, where mandatory reporting legislation does not already apply. All staff and volunteers have additional obligations under the department Code of Conduct for a Child Safe Agency and must report any conduct issues, including any inappropriate behaviour by staff or volunteers, observed while working with children and young persons. Matters involving the conduct of staff is to be managed in accordance with the Workplace Behaviours Policy and Code of Conduct Guidelines. Dealing with matters of child safety can be difficult and can have an emotional impact on staff. Staff are able to contact the Employee Assistance Program EAP to access support when dealing with these matters. 7.2 External reporting The department maintains publicly accessible avenues for members of the public to report allegations of incidents of harm, abuse, neglect or exploitation in connection to the department. Members of the community can report alleged incidents and complaints to feedbackandcomplaints industry.gov.au. The feedback or complaints is to be triaged by the feedback team and referred to the relevant divisional team for action. 7.3 Responding to complaints All complaints made to the department related to child safety are to be investigated in accordance with the National Office for Child Safety s Complaint handling guide. 7.4 Privacy All personal information collected is to be stored, used and disclosed in strict confidence and in accordance with the Australian Privacy Principles and the Privacy Act 1988. The assessment and formal investigation of complaints may involve the collection and use of personal information. Personal information may be disclosed to relevant authorities where required through mandatory or volunteer reporting of suspected or alleged harm or abuse. Personal information may also be used in the conduct of internal investigations, such as potential breaches of the APS Code of Conduct. 8 Communication 8.1 Staff and volunteers The department is to ensure staff and volunteers have access to departmental child safe documents, training and instructions via the intranet, learning management system and via print where requested . This information is provided to all staff and volunteers through induction information on their commencement with the department and is available to access at any other time.   Child Safe and Vulnerable People Policy Version 1.1 11 8.2 Service providers, grants and procurement Third party providers funded by the department are expected to comply with the Commonwealth Child Safe Framework, the National Principles for Child Safe Organisations and the policy principles set out in this document, in addition to any relevant legislation. In accordance with the department s grants guidelines and agreement templates, if activities are likely to involve children or child safety requirements, the model child safety clause as issued by the Department of Finance is to be inserted in to the relevant documentation and obligations of the service provider are to be outlined. 8.3 Service users, parents, children, young people and vulnerable people Department staff who work with children, young people and vulnerable people provide clear age appropriate or developmentally appropriate explanations to children, young people and vulnerable people, including their right to safety, their right to be listened to and that they can provide feedback or make a compliant if they have a concern, to any worker or ask their parent or guardian to do this on their behalf. The department is to listen to and act upon any complaints or concerns a young person raises with us. Feedback and complaints can also be provided to feedbackandcomplaints industry.gov.au. This policy and related documents are made available on the department website and on request.   Child Safe and Vulnerable People Policy Version 1.1 12 9 Definitions Term Definition Child, children or young person s Means any human under the age of 18 years. Child exploitation One or more of the following a committing or coercing another person to commit an act or acts of abuse against a child b possessing, controlling, producing, distributing, obtaining or transmitting child exploitation material c committing or coercing another person to commit an act or acts of grooming or online grooming d using a minor for profit, labour, sexual gratification or some other form of personal or financial advantage. Child protection An activity or initiative designed to protect children from any form of harm, particularly that arising from child exploitation and abuse. Child related work Means being engaged in a work activities where contact physical, face to face, oral, written or electronic contact between a staff member or volunteer and a child would reasonably be expected as a normal part of the work and such contact is not occasional and incidental to the work, or b work that requires a Working with Vulnerable People WWVP or Working with Children Check WWCC in the state or territory jurisdiction in which the work is being undertaken. For the purposes of this definition, occasional means infrequently or irregularly, and incidental means occurring by chance. Child safe position A departmental position that has been identified as having contact with a child as a normal part of work activities that is, child related work , and therefore is required to obtain and maintain a WWVP WWCC in order to be engaged in that position. Criminal Record Check or National Police Check Involves comparing an individual s details against a central index of names using a name matching algorithm to determine if the name and date of birth combination of that individual matches any others who have police history information. The name is then vetted by police personnel to determine what information may be disclosed, subject to relevant legislation and or information release policies. Cultural safety An environment where culturally diverse people feel safe and secure in their identity, culture and community. Emotional abuse A parent or caregiver s inappropriate verbal or symbolic acts towards a child and or a pattern of failure over time to provide a child with adequate non physical nurturing and emotional availability. Such acts of commission or omission are likely to damage a child s self esteem or social competence.   Child Safe and Vulnerable People Policy Version 1.1 13 Harm A reference to harm will be taken to be a reference to physical harm or psychological harm whether caused by an act or omission and includes such harm caused by sexual, physical, mental or emotional abuse or neglect. Psychological harm does not include emotional reactions such as distress, grief, fear or anger that are a response to the ordinary vicissitudes of life. Mandatory reporting Mandatory reporting is the legislative requirement for selected classes of people to report suspected child abuse and neglect to government authorities. Each state and territory has legislation about mandatory reporting. National Police Certificate A document that lists an individual s disclosable court outcomes and pending charges sourced from the databases of all Australian police services. Neglect The failure by a parent or caregiver to provide a child where they are in a position to do so with the conditions that are culturally accepted as being essential for the physical and emotional development and wellbeing of the child. Physical abuse The use of physical force against a child that results in harm for the child s health, survival, development or dignity. This includes hitting, beating, kicking, shaking, biting, strangling, scalding, burning, poisoning and suffocating. Reasonable suspicion A reasonable suspicion or belief may arise when a a child discloses that he or she has been abused b someone close to a child for example, sibling, relative, close friend discloses abuse on behalf of that child c abuse, or evidence of abuse, is witnessed. Sexual abuse The use of a child for sexual gratification by an older or significantly older child, adolescent or adult. Vulnerable person A child or an adult who is disadvantaged and accessing a regulated activity in relation to the disadvantage. Examples of a disadvantaged adult include an adult with a physical or mental disability, who suffers financial hardship and or who cannot communicate or has difficulty communicating in English. Working with children or vulnerable people Being engaged in an activity with a child or vulnerable person where the contact would reasonably be expected as a normal part of the activity and the contact is not incidental to the activity. This includes volunteering or other unpaid work. Working with Children Check or Working with Vulnerable Person Check An assessment of whether a person poses an unacceptable risk to children. As part of this process, the applicant s criminal history, child protection information and other information is checked. A Working with Children Check may also be known under other names, such as a Working with Vulnerable People Check, a Blue Card, Working with Children Clearance or Ochre Card.   Child Safe and Vulnerable People Policy Version 1.1 14 10 Relevant departmental policies and procedures APS Code of Conduct Guidelines Department Code of Conduct for a Child Safety Agency Risk Management Framework Workplace Behaviour Policy 11 Policy review The department is to review this policy and related documentation at minimum every 2 years, or when one of the following occurs New or added risks are identified for children or young people, which may require a change in policy or procedures. A critical incident where a child or young person has experienced harm through involvement with the department. Concerns are raised by anyone involved in the department about child safety or welfare in the department. Awareness or compliance to the policy and or related documents is low. Changes to applicable legislation or requirements. The department is to lodge new compliance statements with the applicable state, territory or federal agency when the policy is reviewed and updated.   Child Safe and Vulnerable People Policy Version 1.1 15 Attachment A Relevant legislation Each state and territory have legislation and guidance on determining what activities, roles and functions require a WWVP WWCC registration. It is the responsibility of the managing work area to check the relevant legislation and guidance when planning or undertaking work which may involve children, young people or vulnerable people, and this information is to be considered in risk assessment and management process. Jurisdiction Relevant legislation Name of check Link to Government Screening Unit Mandatory reporting requirements Exemptions for organised DISR events occurring interstate Australia Crimes Act 1914 Criminal Code Act 1995 Criminal Code Act 1995 Protection of children N A N A N A N A Australian Capital Territory Working with Vulnerable People Background Checking Act 2011 Children and Young People Act 2008 Working with Vulnerable People Check Background Screening Unit, Access Canberra Working with vulnerable people WWVP registration Department staff and volunteers are not defined as mandatory reporters under the Children and Young People Act 2008. No exemptions. Northern Territory Care and Protection of Children Act 2007 Working with Children Clearance Ochre Card Screening Assessment for Employment Northern Territory SAFE NT Working with children clearance apply and renew Reporting is mandatory for any adult who believes a child has been, or is likely to suffer harm or exploitation, or be a victim so a sexual offence under the Care and Protection of Children Act 2007. Reports can be made to the Child Protection Reporting Line on 1800 700 250. No exemptions.   Child Safe and Vulnerable People Policy Version 1.1 16 New South Wales Child Protection Working with Children Act 2012 Children and Young Persons Care and Protection Act 1998 Working with Childrens Check NSW Office of the Children s Guardian Working with Children Check Department staff and volunteers are not defined as mandatory reporters under the Children and Young Persons Care and Protection Act 1998. Worker who is visiting from interstate and working with children for fewer than 30 days must have a current WWCC WWVP check from their resident state territory . Queensland Working with Children Risk Management and Screening Act 2000 Child Protection Act 1999 Blue Card Check Working with Children Check Blue Card Services About the blue card system Department staff and volunteers are not defined as mandatory reporters under the Child Protection Act 1999. Worker who is visiting from interstate and working with children for fewer than 7 days must have a current WWCC WWVP check from their resident state territory . South Australia Children and Young People Safety Act 2017 Child Safety Prohibited Persons Act 2016 DHS Screening Working with Children Check This applies to workers aged 14 or over including work experience students . DHS Screening Unit Department of Human Services Apply for a check Department staff working with children, and their managers, are mandatory reporters under the Children and Young People Safety Act 2017. Mandatory reports must be made to the Child Abuse Report Line CARL on 13 14 78. This applies to workers aged 14 or over including work experience students . Worker who is visiting from interstate and does not exceed 10 consecutive days working with children must have a current WWCC WWVP check from their resident state territory . Tasmania Registration to Work with Vulnerable People Act 2013 Education and Care Service National Law Application Act 2011 Registration to Work with Vulnerable People Working with Children Registration Department of Justice Working with children registration form Department staff working with children are defined as mandatory reporters under the Childrens, Young Persons and their Families Act 1997. Worker who is visiting from interstate must have a current WWCC WWVP check from their resident state territory .   Child Safe and Vulnerable People Policy Version 1.1 17 Victoria Working with Children Act 2005 Children, Youth and Families Act 2005 Working with Children Check Department of Justice and Regulation, Working with Children Check Unit Apply for a Check Department staff and volunteers are not defined as mandatory reporters under the Children, Youth and Families Act 2005. Worker who is visiting from interstate and working with children for maximum of 30 days in a calendar year must have a current WWCC WWVP check from their resident state territory . Western Australia Working with Children Criminal Record Checking Act 2004 Children and Community Services Act 2004 Working with Children Check WWC Screening Unit Department for Child Protection and Family Support Application process Department staff and volunteers are not defined as mandatory reporters under the Children and Community Services Act 2004. Worker who is visiting from interstate and cannot exceed a total of two weeks of working with children in any period of 12 months applies only during the two week period immediately after arrival must have a current WWCC WWVP check from their resident state territory .   Child Safe and Vulnerable People Policy Version 1.1 18 12 Attachment B Code of Conduct for a Child Safe Agency Engaging with children and young people brings additional responsibilities for employees of the department. All staff and volunteers are responsible for promoting and protecting the safety and wellbeing of children and young people by always adhering to the department s Child Safe and Vulnerable People Policy and taking all reasonable steps to ensure the safety and protection of children and young people, treating everyone, including children, young people and their families, with respect, honesty and courtesy at all times, being a positive role model to children and young people in all interactions with them, setting clear boundaries and appropriate behaviour between yourself and the children and young people you come into contact within the course of your duties, being alert to bullying behaviours and responding promptly and appropriately, ensuring another adult is present, or in sight, when conducting one on one business with a child or young person, being alert to children and young people who have been harmed, or may be at risk of harm and reporting this quickly to the appropriate channel depending on your state or territory, responding quickly, fairly, and transparently to any complaints made by a child, young person or their parent guardian, and encouraging children and young people to have a say on issues that are important to them. Staff engaging with children or young people in the course of their duties must not engage in rough physical games, develop any special relationships with children and young people that could be seen as favouritism, such as the offering or receiving of gifts or special treatment, do things of a personal nature that a child or young people can do for themselves, such as toileting or changing clothes, or discriminate against any child or young person because of age, gender, cultural background, religion, vulnerability or sexuality. Reporting Staff or volunteers who witness or have reason to believe a child or young person may have been or is at risk of being harmed have an obligation to report this. To make a report, there are different avenues depending on which state or territory you are in. Refer to the below table for the appropriate method of reporting. Australian Capital Territory ACT Ph 1300 556 729 Online reporting South Australia SA Ph 131 478 Online Reporting New South Wales NSW Ph 132 111 Online reporting Tasmania TAS Ph 1800 000 123 Online reporting Northern Territory NT Ph 1800 700 250 Online Reporting Victoria VIC Ph 13 12 78 Online reporting Queensland QLD Ph 1800 177 135 Online Reporting Western Australia WA Ph 1800 273 889 Online Reporting   Child Safe and Vulnerable People Policy Version 1.1 19 Advice and support For advice and support, staff and volunteers should engage with their local work health and safety team in the first instance or engage the department s work health and safety team by emailing WHS industry.gov.au.   Child Safe and Vulnerable People Policy Version 1.1 20 13 Attachment C Child Safe Professional Behaviours Call 000 if a child is in immediate danger. People working with children in the department are to ensure they adhere to the following behaviours when performing work that involves children Professionally introduce yourself and show your identification to children and their parent or guardian, Do not use language or behaviour towards children that is inappropriate, harassing, abusive, sexually provocative, demeaning or culturally inappropriate, Wherever possible, ensure that another adult is present when working with or near children, Where required to have contact with children in the course of your duties, do not have contact with these children outside of the work environment, Do not use physical or emotional punishment on children, Comply with all relevant legislation including WWVP WWCC and mandatory reporting requirements, Never access or use child related data maintained by the Commonwealth to exploit or harass children, Never use any computers, mobile phones, video cameras, cameras or social media to exploit or harass children, or access child exploitation material through any medium, Immediately disclose to the department all charges, convictions and other outcomes of an offence that relates to child exploitation and abuse, including those that occurred before or during association with the department, Immediately report to your manager concerns or allegations of child exploitation and abuse and failure to comply with this policy in accordance with appropriate procedures, and Before photographing or filming a child or using children s images for work related purposes, always obtain informed consent from the child and parent or guardian of the child. An explanation of how the photograph or film will be used must be provided. Staff and volunteers are also expected to uphold the APS Code of Conduct, APS Values and the department Code of Conduct for a Child Safe Agency.   Child Safe and Vulnerable People Policy Version 1.1 21 14 Attachment D Identified child safe risks and treatment actions Identified risk Controls to minimise risk Culture of department is not child safe focused. A child focused Code of Conduct has been put in place that sets the behavioural standards expected, including what happens when a breach occurs. Culture of management reflects the department s strong commitment to the safety of children and young people. The National Principles for Child Safe Organisations are embedded into department policies and procedures. The department meets the requirements of the relevant child safety legislation in each applicable state and territory where child related work occurs e.g., the Children and Young People Safety Act 2012 SA , which mandates child safe environments and the Child Safety Prohibited Persons Act 2016 SA , which mandates Working with Children Checks . Department workers harm children or young people. Recruitment processes are in place, including undertaking referee checks to ensure the suitability of persons before they are employed by or volunteer with our department. All staff and volunteers have WWVP WWCC with no prohibitions prior to working with children and young people. WWVP WWCC registrations are updated every 5 years and status remains as not prohibited. Children, young people and their families have access to our policy and have avenues to submit feedback or complaints. Department workers don t understand their obligations to report harm and risk of harm. Staff and volunteers who work with or in relation to children are provided with training annually on child safety, mechanisms to report harm or suspected harm, and mandatory reporting requirements where applicable . Staff and volunteers who work with or in relation to children must abide by the policy, the APS Code of Conduct, APS values, the Code of Conduct for a Child Safe Agency and uphold the Child Safe Professional Behaviours. Physical contact Any physical contact must be appropriate to the delivery of the services being provided. Where physical contact is required, this is undertaken in a safe way by explaining why the contact is required and what will happen and asking the child or young person for their permission or their parent or guardian if this is more appropriate before proceeding. Unnecessary physical contact is prohibited. Online communications The department has a social media policy in place and is available to all staff. Supervision Children and young people are to be always supervised by parents or guardians.   Child Safe and Vulnerable People Policy Version 1.1 22 Taking images of children and young people Consent of child or young person and parent or guardian is required before any photographs or video are taken. Disclosure is to be made as to how the image is to be used and consent must be provided by the child or young person and parent or guardian. Physical environment The department maintains risk registers that are regularly reviewed to ensure the safety of the workplace. The department monitors equipment, materials and facilities to ensure they are operating as intended and safely. Privacy and confidentiality The department handles all personal and sensitive information in accordance with the Australian Privacy Principles and the Privacy Act 1988. 