REGULATION EC No 300 2008 OF THE EUROPEAN PARLIAMENT AND OF THE COUNCIL of 11 March 2008 on common rules in the field of civil aviation security and repealing Regulation EC No 2320 2002 Text with EEA relevance THE EUROPEAN PARLIAMENT AND THE COUNCIL OF THE EURO PEAN UNION, Having regard to the Treaty establishing the European Commu nity, and in particular Article 80 2 thereof, Having regard to the proposal from the Commission, Having regard to the opinion of the European Economic and Social Committee 1 , Having consulted the Committee of the Regions, Acting in accordance with the procedure laid down in Article 251 of the Treaty 2 , in the light of the joint text approved by the Con ciliation Committee on 16 January 2008. Whereas 1 In order to protect persons and goods within the European Union, acts of unlawful interference with civil aircraft that jeopardise the security of civil aviation should be prevented by establishing common rules for safeguarding civil avia tion. This objective should be achieved by setting common rules and common basic standards on aviation security as well as mechanisms for monitoring compliance. 2 It is desirable, in the interests of civil aviation security gen erally, to provide the basis for a common interpretation of Annex 17 to the Chicago Convention on International Civil Aviation of 7 December 1944. 3 Regulation EC No 2320 2002 of the European Parlia ment and of the Council of 16 December 2002 establish ing common rules in the field of civil aviation security 3 was adopted as a result of the events of 11 September 2001 in the United States. A common approach is needed in the field of civil aviation security and consideration should be given to the most effective means of offering assistance following terrorist acts that have a major impact in the transport field. 4 The content of Regulation EC No 2320 2002 should be revised in the light of the experience gained, and the Regu lation itself should be repealed and replaced by this Regu lation seeking the simplification, harmonisation and clarification of the existing rules and the improvement of the levels of security. 5 Given the need for more flexibility in adopting security measures and procedures in order to meet evolving risk assessments and to allow new technologies to be intro duced, this Regulation should lay down the basic principles of what has to be done in order to safeguard civil aviation against acts of unlawful interference without going into the technical and procedural details of how they are to be implemented. 6 This Regulation should apply to airports serving civil avia tion located in the territory of a Member State, to opera tors providing services at such airports and to entities providing goods and or services to or through such airports. 7 Without prejudice to the Convention on offences and cer tain other acts committed on board aircraft, Tokyo, 1963, the Convention for the suppression of unlawful seizure of aircraft, The Hague, 1970, and the Convention for the sup pression of unlawful acts against the safety of civil aviation, Montreal, 1971, this Regulation should also cover security measures that apply on board an aircraft, or during a flight, of Community air carriers. 8 Each Member State retains the competence to decide whether to deploy in flight security officers on aircraft reg istered in that Member State and on flights of air carriers licensed by it as well as to ensure, in accordance with para graph 4.7.7 of Annex 17 to the Chicago Convention on International Civil Aviation and under the terms of that Convention, that such officers are government personnel who are specially selected and trained, taking into account the required security and safety aspects on board an aircraft. 1 OJ C 185, 8.8.2006, p. 17. 2 Opinion of the European Parliament of 15 June 2006 OJ C 300 E, 9.12.2006, p. 463 , Council Common Position of 11 December 2006 OJ C 70 E, 27.3.2007, p. 21 and Position of the European Parliament of 25 April 2007 not yet published in the Official Journal , Legisla tive Resolution of the European Parliament of 11 March 2008 not yet published in the Official Journal and Council Decision of 4 March 2008. 3 OJ L 355, 30.12.2002, p. 1. Regulation as amended by Regulation EC No 849 2004 OJ L 158, 30.4.2004, p. 1, corrected by OJ L 229, 29.6.2004, p. 3 . L 97 72 EN Official Journal of the European Union 9.4.2008   9 The various types of civil aviation do not necessarily present the same level of threat. In setting common basic standards on aviation security, the size of the aircraft, the nature of the operation and or the frequency of operations at airports should be taken into account with a view to per mitting the grant of derogations. 10 Member States should also be allowed, on the basis of a risk assessment, to apply more stringent measures than those laid down in this Regulation. 11 Third countries may require the application of measures that differ from those laid down in this Regulation in respect of flights from an airport in a Member State to, or over, that third country. However, without prejudice to any bilateral agreements to which the Community is a party, it should be possible for the Commission to exam ine the measures required by the third country. 12 Even though, within a single Member State, there may be two or more bodies involved in aviation security, each Member State should designate a single authority respon sible for the coordination and monitoring of the imple mentation of security standards. 13 In order to define responsibilities for the implementation of the common basic standards on aviation security and to describe what measures are required by operators and other entities for this purpose, each Member State should draw up a national civil aviation security programme. Fur thermore, each airport operator, air carrier and entity implementing aviation security standards should draw up, apply and maintain a security programme in order to com ply both with this Regulation and with whichever national civil aviation security programme is applicable. 14 In order to monitor compliance with this Regulation and with the national civil aviation security programme, each Member State should draw up and ensure the implemen tation of a national programme to check the level and quality of civil aviation security. 15 In order to monitor the application by Member States of this Regulation, and also to make recommendations to improve aviation security, the Commission should conduct inspections, including unannounced inspections. 16 As a general rule, the Commission should publish mea sures that have a direct impact on passengers. Implement ing acts setting out common measures and procedures for the implementation of the common basic standards on aviation security which contain sensitive security informa tion, together with Commission inspection reports and the answers of the appropriate authorities should be regarded as EU classified information within the meaning of Com mission Decision 2001 844 EC, ECSC, Euratom of 29 November 2001 amending its internal rules of proce dure 1 . Those items should not be published and should be made available only to those operators and entities with a legitimate interest. 17 The measures necessary for the implementation of this Regulation should be adopted in accordance with Council Decision 1999 468 EC of 28 June 1999 laying down the procedures for the exercise of implementing powers con ferred on the Commission 2 . 18 In particular, the Commission should be empowered to adopt general measures amending non essential elements of the common basic standards by supplementing them, set criteria allowing Member States both to derogate from the common basic standards and to adopt alternative secu rity measures, and adopt specifications for national quality control programmes. Since those measures are of general scope and are designed to amend non essential elements of this Regulation by supplementing it with new non essential elements, they must be adopted in accordance with the regulatory procedure with scrutiny provided for in Article 5a of Decision 1999 468 EC. 19 When, on imperative grounds of urgency, the normal time limits for the regulatory procedure with scrutiny cannot be complied with, the Commission should be able to apply the urgency procedure provided for in Article 5a 6 of Decision 1999 468 EC for the adoption of common rules for safeguarding civil aviation. 20 The goal of one stop security for all flights within the European Union should be advanced. 21 Furthermore, it should not be necessary to rescreen pas sengers or their baggage arriving on flights from third countries that have aviation security standards equivalent to those laid down by this Regulation. Therefore, without prejudice to the right of each Member State to apply more stringent measures, or to the respective competences of the Community and Member States, decisions of the Commis sion, and, where necessary, agreements between the Com munity and third countries, which recognise that the security standards applied in the third country are equiva lent to the common standards, should be encouraged since these further one stop security. 22 This Regulation is without prejudice to the application of rules on aviation safety, including those relating to the transport of dangerous goods. 1 OJ L 317, 3.12.2001, p. 1. Decision as last amended by Decision 2006 548 EC, Euratom OJ L 215, 5.8.2006, p. 38 . 2 OJ L 184, 17.7.1999, p. 23. Decision as amended by Decision 2006 512 EC OJ L 200, 22.7.2006, p. 11 . 9.4.2008 EN Official Journal of the European Union L 97 73   23 Penalties should be provided for infringements of the pro visions of this Regulation. Those penalties, which may be of a civil or administrative nature, should be effective, pro portionate and dissuasive. 24 The Ministerial Statement on Gibraltar Airport, agreed in Cordoba on 18 September 2006 during the first Ministe rial meeting of the Forum of Dialogue on Gibraltar, will replace the Joint Declaration on Gibraltar Airport made in London on 2 December 1987, and full compliance with it will be deemed to constitute compliance with the 1987 Declaration. 25 Since the objectives of this Regulation, namely to safeguard civil aviation against acts of unlawful interference and to provide a basis for a common interpretation of Annex 17 to the Chicago Convention on International Civil Aviation, cannot be sufficiently achieved by the Member States and can therefore, by reason of the scale and effects of this Regulation, be better achieved at Community level, the Community may adopt measures, in accordance with the principle of subsidiarity as set out in Article 5 of the Treaty. In accordance with the principle of proportionality, as set out in that Article, this Regulation does not go beyond what is necessary in order to achieve those objectives, HAVE ADOPTED THIS REGULATION Article 1 Objectives 1. This Regulation establishes common rules to protect civil aviation against acts of unlawful interference that jeopardise the security of civil aviation. It also provides the basis for a common interpretation of Annex 17 to the Chicago Convention on International Civil Aviation. 2. The means of achieving the objectives set out in paragraph 1 shall be a the setting of common rules and common basic standards on aviation security b mechanisms for monitoring compliance. Article 2 Scope 1. This Regulation shall apply to the following a all airports or parts of airports located in the territory of a Member State that are not exclusively used for military purposes b all operators, including air carriers, providing services at air ports referred to in point a c all entities applying aviation security standards that operate from premises located inside or outside airport premises and provide goods and or services to or through airports referred to in point a . 2. The application of this Regulation to the airport of Gibral tar is understood to be without prejudice to the respective legal positions of the Kingdom of Spain and the United Kingdom with regard to the dispute over sovereignty over the territory in which the airport is situated. Article 3 Definitions For the purposes of this Regulation 1. civil aviation means any air operation carried out by civil air craft, excluding operations carried out by State aircraft referred to in Article 3 of the Chicago Convention on Inter national Civil Aviation 2. aviation security means the combination of measures and human and material resources intended to safeguard civil aviation against acts of unlawful interference that jeopardise the security of civil aviation 3. operator means a person, organisation or enterprise engaged, or offering to engage, in an air transport operation 4. air carrier means an air transport undertaking holding a valid operating licence or equivalent 5. Community air carrier means an air carrier holding a valid operating licence granted by a Member State in accordance with Council Regulation EEC No 2407 92 of 23 July 1992 on licensing of air carriers 1 6. entity means a person, organisation or enterprise, other than an operator 7. prohibited articles means weapons, explosives or other dan gerous devices, articles or substances that may be used to commit an act of unlawful interference that jeopardises the security of civil aviation 8. screening means the application of technical or other means which are intended to identify and or detect prohibited articles 1 OJ L 240, 24.8.1992, p. 1. L 97 74 EN Official Journal of the European Union 9.4.2008  9. security control means the application of means by which the introduction of prohibited articles may be prevented 10. access control means the application of means by which the entry of unauthorised persons or unauthorised vehicles, or both, may be prevented 11. airside means the movement area of an airport, adjacent ter rain and buildings or portions thereof, access to which is restricted 12. landside means those parts of an airport, adjacent terrain and buildings or portions thereof that are not airside 13. security restricted area means that area of airside where, in addition to access being restricted, other aviation security standards are applied 14. demarcated area means an area that is separated by means of access control either from security restricted areas, or, if the demarcated area itself is a security restricted area, from other security restricted areas of an airport 15. background check means a recorded check of a person s identity, including any criminal history, as part of the assess ment of an individual s suitability for unescorted access to security restricted areas 16. transfer passengers, baggage, cargo or mail means passen gers, baggage, cargo or mail departing on an aircraft other than that on which they arrived 17. transit passengers, baggage, cargo or mail means passengers, baggage, cargo or mail departing on the same aircraft as that on which they arrived 18. potentially disruptive passenger means a passenger who is either a deportee, a person deemed to be inadmissible for immigration reasons or a person in lawful custody 19. cabin baggage means baggage intended for carriage in the cabin of an aircraft 20. hold baggage means baggage intended for carriage in the hold of an aircraft 21. accompanied hold baggage means baggage, carried in the hold of an aircraft, which has been checked in for a flight by a passenger travelling on that same flight 22. air carrier mail means mail whose origin and destination are both an air carrier 23. air carrier materials means materials either whose origin and destination are both an air carrier or that are used by an air carrier 24. mail means dispatches of correspondence and other items, other than air carrier mail, tendered by and intended for delivery to postal services in accordance with the rules of the Universal Postal Union 25. cargo means any property intended for carriage on an air craft, other than baggage, mail, air carrier mail, air carrier materials and in flight supplies 26. regulated agent means an air carrier, agent, freight forwarder or any other entity who ensures security controls in respect of cargo or mail 27. known consignor means a consignor who originates cargo or mail for its own account and whose procedures meet common security rules and standards sufficient to allow car riage of cargo or mail on any aircraft 28. account consignor means a consignor who originates cargo or mail for its own account and whose procedures meet common security rules and standards sufficient to allow car riage of that cargo on all cargo aircraft or mail on all mail aircraft 29. aircraft security check means an inspection of those parts of the interior of the aircraft to which passengers may have had access, together with an inspection of the hold of the aircraft in order to detect prohibited articles and unlawful interfer ences with the aircraft 30. aircraft security search means an inspection of the interior and accessible exterior of the aircraft in order to detect pro hibited articles and unlawful interferences that jeopardise the security of the aircraft 31. in flight security officer means a person who is employed by a state to travel on an aircraft of an air carrier licensed by it with the purpose of protecting that aircraft and its occupants against acts of unlawful interference that jeopardise the secu rity of the flight. Article 4 Common basic standards 1. The common basic standards for safeguarding civil aviation against acts of unlawful interference that jeopardise the security of civil aviation shall be as laid down in the Annex. Additional common basic standards not foreseen at the entry into force of this Regulation should be added to the Annex in accor dance with the procedure referred to in Article 251 of the Treaty. 9.4.2008 EN Official Journal of the European Union L 97 75  2. General measures, designed to amend non essential ele ments of the common basic standards referred to in paragraph 1 by supplementing them, shall be adopted in accordance with the regulatory procedure with scrutiny referred to in Article 19 3 . These general measures shall concern a methods of screening allowed b categories of articles that may be prohibited c as regards access control, grounds for granting access to air side and security restricted areas d methods allowed for the examination of vehicles, aircraft security checks and aircraft security searches e criteria for recognising the equivalence of security standards of third countries f conditions under which cargo and mail shall be screened or subjected to other security controls, as well as the process for the approval or designation of regulated agents, known con signors and account consignors g conditions under which air carrier mail and air carrier mate rials shall be screened or subjected to other security controls h conditions under which in flight supplies and airport sup plies shall be screened or subjected to other security controls, as well as the process for the approval or designation of regu lated suppliers and known suppliers i criteria for defining critical parts of security restricted areas j criteria for staff recruitment and methods of training k conditions under which special security procedures or exemptions from security controls may be applied and l any general measures designed to amend non essential ele ments of the common basic standards referred to in para graph 1 by supplementing them not foreseen at the date of entry into force of this Regulation. On imperative grounds of urgency, the Commission may use the urgency procedure referred to in Article 19 4 . 3. Detailed measures for the implementation of the common basic standards referred to in paragraph 1 and the general mea sures referred to in paragraph 2 shall be laid down in accordance with the regulatory procedure referred to in Article 19 2 . These shall include a requirements and procedures for screening b a list of prohibited articles c requirements and procedures for access control d requirements and procedures for the examination of vehicles, aircraft security checks and aircraft security searches e decisions to recognise the equivalence of security standards applied in a third country f as regards cargo and mail, procedures for the approval or designation of, and the obligations to be fulfilled by, regu lated agents, known consignors and account consignors g requirements and procedures for security controls of air car rier mail and air carrier materials h as regards in flight supplies and airport supplies, procedures for the approval or designation of, and the obligations to be fulfilled by, regulated suppliers and known suppliers i definition of critical parts of security restricted areas j staff recruitment and training requirements k special security procedures or exemptions from security controls l technical specifications and procedures for approval and use of security equipment and m requirements and procedures concerning potentially disrup tive passengers. 4. The Commission shall, by amending this Regulation through a decision in accordance with the regulatory procedure with scrutiny referred to in Article 19 3 , set criteria to allow Member States to derogate from the common basic standards referred to in paragraph 1 and to adopt alternative security mea sures that provide an adequate level of protection on the basis of a local risk assessment. Such alternative measures shall be justi fied by reasons relating to the size of the aircraft, or by reasons relating to the nature, scale or frequency of operations or of other relevant activities. On imperative grounds of urgency, the Commission may use the urgency procedure referred to in Article 19 4 . The Member States shall inform the Commission of such measures. L 97 76 EN Official Journal of the European Union 9.4.2008  5. Member States shall ensure the application in their territory of the common basic standards referred to in paragraph 1. Where a Member State has reason to believe that the level of aviation security has been compromised through a security breach, it shall ensure that appropriate and prompt action is taken to rectify that breach and ensure the continuing security of civil aviation. Article 5 Security costs Subject to the relevant rules of Community law, each Member State may determine in which circumstances, and the extent to which, the costs of security measures taken under this Regulation to protect civil aviation against acts of unlawful interference should be borne by the State, the airport entities, air carriers, other responsible agencies, or users. If appropriate, and in conformity with Community law, Member States may contribute with users to the costs of more stringent security measures taken under this Regulation. As far as may be practicable, any charges or transfers of security costs shall be directly related to the costs of providing the security services concerned and shall be designed to recover no more than the relevant costs involved. Article 6 More stringent measures applied by Member States 1. Member States may apply more stringent measures than the common basic standards referred to in Article 4. In doing so, they shall act on the basis of a risk assessment and in compliance with Community law. Τhose measures shall be relevant, objective, non discriminatory and proportional to the risk that is being addressed. 2. Member States shall inform the Commission of such mea sures as soon as possible after their application. Upon reception of such information, the Commission shall transmit this informa tion to the other Member States. 3. Member States are not required to inform the Commission where the measures concerned are limited to a given flight on a specific date. Article 7 Security measures required by third countries 1. Without prejudice to any bilateral agreements to which the Community is a party, a Member State shall notify the Commis sion of measures required by a third country if they differ from the common basic standards referred to in Article 4 in respect of flights from an airport in a Member State to, or over, that third country. 2. At the request of the Member State concerned or on its own initiative, the Commission shall examine the application of any measures notified under paragraph 1 and may, in accordance with the regulatory procedure referred to in Article 19 2 , draw up an appropriate response to the third country concerned. 3. Paragraphs 1 and 2 shall not apply if a the Member State concerned applies the measures concerned in accordance with Article 6 or b the requirement of the third country is limited to a given flight on a specific date. Article 8 Cooperation with the International Civil Aviation Organisation Without prejudice to Article 300 of the Treaty, the Commission may conclude a Memorandum of Understanding concerning audits with the International Civil Aviation Organisation ICAO in order to avoid duplicate monitoring of Member States com pliance with Annex 17 to the Chicago Convention on Interna tional Civil Aviation. Article 9 Appropriate authority Where, within a single Member State, two or more bodies are involved in civil aviation security, that Member State shall desig nate a single authority hereinafter referred to as the appropriate authority to be responsible for the coordination and monitoring of the implementation of the common basic standards referred to in Article 4. Article 10 National civil aviation security programme 1. Every Member State shall draw up, apply and maintain a national civil aviation security programme. That programme shall define responsibilities for the implementa tion of the common basic standards referred to in Article 4 and shall describe the measures required by operators and entities for this purpose. 2. The appropriate authority shall make available in writing on a need to know basis the appropriate parts of its national civil aviation security programme to operators and entities which it deems to have a legitimate interest. 9.4.2008 EN Official Journal of the European Union L 97 77  Article 11 National quality control programme 1. Every Member State shall draw up, apply and maintain a national quality control programme. That programme shall enable the Member State to check the qual ity of civil aviation security in order to monitor compliance both with this Regulation and with its national civil aviation security programme. 2. The specifications for the national quality control pro gramme shall be adopted by amending this Regulation through the addition of an annex in accordance with the regulatory pro cedure with scrutiny referred to in Article 19 3 . On imperative grounds of urgency, the Commission may use the urgency procedure referred to in Article 19 4 . The programme shall allow for the swift detection and correction of deficiencies. It shall also provide that all airports, operators and entities responsible for the implementation of aviation security standards that are located in the territory of the Member State concerned shall be regularly monitored directly by, or under the supervision of, the appropriate authority. Article 12 Airport security programme 1. Every airport operator shall draw up, apply and maintain an airport security programme. That programme shall describe the methods and procedures which are to be followed by the airport operator in order to com ply both with this Regulation and with the national civil aviation security programme of the Member State in which the airport is located. The programme shall include internal quality control provisions describing how compliance with these methods and procedures is to be monitored by the airport operator. 2. The airport security programme shall be submitted to the appropriate authority, which may take further action if appropriate. Article 13 Air carrier security programme 1. Every air carrier shall draw up, apply and maintain an air carrier security programme. That programme shall describe the methods and procedures which are to be followed by the air carrier in order to comply both with this Regulation and with the national civil aviation security programme of the Member State from which it provides services. The programme shall include internal quality control provisions describing how compliance with these methods and procedures is to be monitored by the air carrier. 2. Upon request, the air carrier security programme shall be submitted to the appropriate authority, which may take further action if appropriate. 3. Where a Community air carrier security programme has been validated by the appropriate authority of the Member State granting the operating licence, the air carrier shall be recognised by all other Member States as having fulfilled the requirements of paragraph 1. This is without prejudice to a Member State s right to request from any air carrier details of its implementation of a the security measures applied by that Member State under Article 6 and or b local procedures that are applicable at the airports served. Article 14 Entity security programme 1. Every entity required under the national civil aviation secu rity programme referred to in Article 10 to apply aviation secu rity standards shall draw up, apply and maintain a security programme. That programme shall describe the methods and procedures which are to be followed by the entity in order to comply with the national civil aviation security programme of the Member State in respect of its operations in that Member State. The programme shall include internal quality control provisions describing how compliance with these methods and procedures is to be monitored by the entity itself. 2. Upon request, the security programme of the entity apply ing aviation security standards shall be submitted to the appro priate authority, which may take further action if appropriate. Article 15 Commission inspections 1. The Commission, acting in cooperation with the appropri ate authority of the Member State concerned, shall conduct inspections, including inspections of airports, operators and enti ties applying aviation security standards, in order to monitor the application by Member States of this Regulation and, as appro priate, to make recommendations to improve aviation security. For this purpose, the appropriate authority shall inform the Com mission in writing of all airports in its territory serving civil avia tion other than those covered by Article 4 4 . The procedures for conducting Commission inspections shall be adopted in accordance with the regulatory procedure referred to in Article 19 2 . L 97 78 EN Official Journal of the European Union 9.4.2008  2. Commission inspections of airports, operators and entities applying aviation security standards shall be unannounced. The Commission shall in good time before an inspection inform the Member State concerned thereof. 3. Each Commission inspection report shall be communicated to the appropriate authority of the Member State concerned, which shall, in its answer, set out the measures taken to remedy any identified deficiencies. The report, together with the answer of the appropriate author ity, shall subsequently be communicated to the appropriate authority of the other Member States. Article 16 Annual report Every year the Commission shall present a report to the European Parliament, the Council and the Member States informing them of the application of this Regulation and of its impact on improving aviation security. Article 17 Stakeholders Advisory Group Without prejudice to the role of the Committee referred to in Article 19, the Commission shall establish a Stakeholders Advi sory Group on Aviation Security, composed of European repre sentative organisations engaged in, or directly affected by, aviation security. The role of this group shall be solely to advise the Com mission. The Committee referred to in Article 19 shall keep the Stakeholders Advisory Group informed during the entire regula tory process. Article 18 Dissemination of information As a general rule, the Commission shall publish measures that have a direct impact on passengers. However, the following docu ments shall be regarded as EU classified information within the meaning of Decision 2001 844 EC, ECSC, Euratom a measures and procedures as referred to in Articles 4 3 , 4 4 , 6 1 and 7 1 , if containing sensitive security information b the Commission inspection reports and the answers of the appropriate authorities referred to in Article 15 3 . Article 19 Committee procedure 1. The Commission shall be assisted by a Committee. 2. Where reference is made to this paragraph, Articles 5 and 7 of Decision 1999 468 EC shall apply, having regard to the pro visions of Article 8 thereof. The period laid down in Article 5 6 of Decision 1999 468 EC shall be set at one month. 3. Where reference is made to this paragraph, Article 5a 1 to 4 and Article 7 of Decision 1999 468 EC shall apply, having regard to the provisions of Article 8 thereof. 4. Where reference is made to this paragraph, Article 5a 1 , 2 , 4 , and 6 and Article 7 of Decision 1999 468 EC shall apply, having regard to the provisions of Article 8 thereof. Article 20 Agreements between the Community and third countries When appropriate, and in conformity with Community law, agreements recognising that the security standards applied in a third country are equivalent to Community standards could be envisaged in aviation agreements between the Community and a third country in accordance with Article 300 of the Treaty, in order to advance the goal of one stop security for all flights between the European Union and third countries. Article 21 Penalties Member States shall lay down the rules on penalties applicable to infringements of the provisions of this Regulation and shall take all measures necessary to ensure that they are implemented. The penalties provided for must be effective, proportionate and dissuasive. Article 22 Commission report on financing The Commission will report, no later than 31 December 2008, on the principles of the financing of the costs of civil aviation secu rity measures. That report will consider what steps need to be taken in order to ensure that security charges are used exclusively to meet security costs, and to improve the transparency of such charges. The report will also address the principles necessary to safeguard undistorted competition between airports and between air carriers, and the different methods to ensure consumer pro tection as regards the distribution of the costs of security mea sures between taxpayers and users. The Commission report will be accompanied, if appropriate, by a legislative proposal. Article 23 Repeal Regulation EC No 2320 2002 is hereby repealed. 9.4.2008 EN Official Journal of the European Union L 97 79  Article 24 Entry into force 1. This Regulation shall enter into force on the 20th day fol lowing its publication in the Official Journal of the European Union. 2. It shall apply as from the date specified in the implement ing rules adopted in accordance with the procedures referred to in Article 4 2 and 3 , but not later than 24 months after the entry into force of this Regulation. 3. By way of exception to paragraph 2, Articles 4 2 , 4 3 , 4 4 , 8, 11 2 , 15 1 second subparagraph, 17, 19 and 22 shall apply from the date of entry into force of this Regulation. This Regulation shall be binding in its entirety and directly applicable in all Member States. Done at Strasbourg, 11 March 2008. For the European Parliament The President H. G. PÖTTERING For the Council The President J. LENARČIČ L 97 80 EN Official Journal of the European Union 9.4.2008  ANNEX COMMON BASIC STANDARDS FOR SAFEGUARDING CIVIL AVIATION AGAINST ACTS OF UNLAWFUL INTERFERENCE ARTICLE 4 1. AIRPORT SECURITY 1.1. Airport planning requirements 1. When designing and constructing new airport facilities or altering existing airport facilities, requirements for the implementation of the common basic standards set out in this Annex and its implementing acts shall be fully taken into account. 2. At airports the following areas shall be established a landside b airside c security restricted areas and d critical parts of security restricted areas. 1.2. Access control 1. Access to airside shall be restricted in order to prevent unauthorised persons and vehicles from entering these areas. 2. Access to security restricted areas shall be controlled in order to ensure that no unauthorised persons and vehicles enter these areas. 3. Persons and vehicles may be granted access to airside and security restricted areas only if they fulfil the required security conditions. 4. Persons, including flight crew members, shall have successfully completed a background check before either a crew identification card or an airport identification card authorising unescorted access to security restricted areas is issued to them. 1.3. Screening of persons other than passengers and items carried 1. Persons other than passengers, together with items carried, shall be screened on a continuous random basis upon entering security restricted areas in order to prevent prohibited articles from being introduced into these areas. 2. All persons other than passengers, together with items carried, shall be screened upon entering critical parts of security restricted areas in order to prevent prohibited articles from being introduced into these parts. 1.4. Examination of vehicles Vehicles entering a security restricted area shall be examined in order to prevent prohibited articles from being intro duced into these areas. 1.5. Surveillance, patrols and other physical controls There shall be surveillance, patrols and other physical controls at airports and, where appropriate, in adjacent areas with public access, in order to identify suspicious behaviour of persons, to identify vulnerabilities which could be exploited to carry out an act of unlawful interference and to deter persons from committing such acts. 9.4.2008 EN Official Journal of the European Union L 97 81  2. DEMARCATED AREAS OF AIRPORTS Aircraft parked in demarcated areas of airports to which alternative measures referred to in Article 4 4 apply, shall be separated from aircraft to which the common basic standards apply in full, in order to ensure that security standards applied to aircraft, passengers, baggage, cargo and mail of the latter are not compromised. 3. AIRCRAFT SECURITY 1. Before departure, an aircraft shall be subjected to an aircraft security check or aircraft security search in order to ensure that no prohibited articles are present on board. An aircraft in transit may be subjected to other appro priate measures. 2. Every aircraft shall be protected from unauthorised interference. 4. PASSENGERS AND CABIN BAGGAGE 4.1. Screening of passengers and cabin baggage 1. All originating, transfer and transit passengers and their cabin baggage shall be screened in order to prevent pro hibited articles from being introduced into security restricted areas and on board an aircraft. 2. Transfer passengers and their cabin baggage may be exempted from screening, if a they arrive from a Member State, unless the Commission or that Member State has provided information that those passengers and their cabin baggage cannot be considered as having been screened to the com mon basic standards or b they arrive from a third country where the security standards applied are recognised as equivalent to the common basic standards in accordance with the regulatory procedure referred to in Article 19 2 . 3. Transit passengers and their cabin baggage may be exempted from screening, if a they remain on board the aircraft or b they do not mix with screened departing passengers other than those who board the same aircraft or c they arrive from a Member State, unless the Commission or that Member State has provided information that those passengers and their cabin baggage cannot be considered as having been screened to the com mon basic standards or d they arrive from a third country where the security standards applied are recognised as equivalent to the common basic standards in accordance with the regulatory procedure referred to in Article 19 2 . 4.2. Protection of passengers and cabin baggage 1. Passengers and their cabin baggage shall be protected from unauthorised interference from the point at which they are screened until departure of the aircraft on which they are carried. 2. Screened departing passengers shall not mix with arriving passengers, unless a the passengers arrive from a Member State, provided that the Commission or that Member State has not provided information that those arriving passengers and their cabin baggage cannot be considered as hav ing been screened to the common basic standards or b the passengers arrive from a third country where the security standards applied are recognised as equivalent to the common basic standards in accordance with the regulatory procedure referred to in Article 19 2 . L 97 82 EN Official Journal of the European Union 9.4.2008  4.3. Potentially disruptive passengers Before departure potentially disruptive passengers shall be subjected to appropriate security measures. 5. HOLD BAGGAGE 5.1. Screening of hold baggage 1. All hold baggage shall be screened prior to being loaded onto an aircraft in order to prevent prohibited articles from being introduced into security restricted areas and on board aircraft. 2. Transfer hold baggage may be exempted from screening, if a it arrives from a Member State, unless the Commission or that Member State has provided information that this hold baggage cannot be considered as having been screened to the common basic standards or b it arrives from a third country where the security standards applied are recognised as equivalent to the com mon basic standards in accordance with the regulatory procedure referred to in Article 19 2 . 3. Transit hold baggage may be exempted from screening if it remains on board the aircraft. 5.2. Protection of hold baggage Hold baggage to be carried on an aircraft shall be protected from unauthorised interference from the point at which it is screened or accepted into the care of the air carrier, whichever is earlier, until the departure of the aircraft on which it is to be carried. 5.3. Baggage reconciliation 1. Each item of hold baggage shall be identified as accompanied or unaccompanied. 2. Unaccompanied hold baggage shall not be transported, unless that baggage has been either separated due to fac tors beyond the passenger s control or subjected to appropriate security controls. 6. CARGO AND MAIL 6.1. Security controls for cargo and mail 1. All cargo and mail shall be subjected to security controls prior to being loaded on an aircraft. An air carrier shall not accept cargo or mail for carriage on an aircraft unless it has applied such controls itself or their application has been confirmed and accounted for by a regulated agent, a known consignor or an account consignor. 2. Transfer cargo and transfer mail may be subjected to alternative security controls to be detailed in an implement ing act. 3. Transit cargo and transit mail may be exempted from security controls if it remains on board the aircraft. 6.2. Protection of cargo and mail 1. Cargo and mail to be carried on an aircraft shall be protected from unauthorised interference from the point at which security controls are applied until the departure of the aircraft on which it is to be carried. 2. Cargo and mail that are not adequately protected from unauthorised interference after security controls have been applied shall be screened. 9.4.2008 EN Official Journal of the European Union L 97 83  7. AIR CARRIER MAIL AND AIR CARRIER MATERIALS Air carrier mail and air carrier materials shall be subjected to security controls and thereafter protected until loaded onto the aircraft in order to prevent prohibited articles from being introduced on board an aircraft. 8. IN FLIGHT SUPPLIES In flight supplies, including catering, intended for carriage or use on board an aircraft shall be subjected to security controls and thereafter protected until loaded onto the aircraft in order to prevent prohibited articles from being intro duced on board an aircraft. 9. AIRPORT SUPPLIES Supplies intended to be sold or used in security restricted areas of airports, including supplies for duty free shops and restaurants, shall be subjected to security controls in order to prevent prohibited articles from being introduced into these areas. 10. IN FLIGHT SECURITY MEASURES 1. Without prejudice to the applicable aviation safety rules a unauthorised persons shall be prevented from entering the flight crew compartment during a flight b potentially disruptive passengers shall be subjected to appropriate security measures during a flight. 2. Appropriate security measures such as training of flight crew and cabin staff shall be taken to prevent acts of unlawful interference during a flight. 3. Weapons, with the exception of those carried in the hold, shall not be carried on board an aircraft, unless the required security conditions in accordance with national laws have been fulfilled and authorisation has been given by the states involved. 4. Paragraph 3 shall also apply to in flight security officers if they carry weapons. 11. STAFF RECRUITMENT AND TRAINING 1. Persons implementing, or responsible for implementing, screening, access control or other security controls shall be recruited, trained and, where appropriate, certified so as to ensure that they are suitable for employment and competent to undertake the duties to which they are assigned. 2. Persons other than passengers requiring access to security restricted areas shall receive security training, before either an airport identification card or crew identification card is issued. 3. Training as mentioned in paragraphs 1 and 2 shall be conducted on initial and recurrent basis. 4. Instructors engaged in the training of the persons mentioned in paragraphs 1 and 2 shall have the necessary qualifications. 12. SECURITY EQUIPMENT Equipment used for screening, access control and other security controls shall comply with the defined specifications and be capable of performing the security controls concerned. L 97 84 EN Official Journal of the European Union 9.4.2008 