Official Journal of the European Union L 300 51 REGULATION EC No 1071 2009 OF THE EUROPEAN PARLIAMENT AND OF THE COUNCIL of 21 October 2009 establishing common rules concerning the conditions to be complied with to pursue the occupation of road transport operator and repealing Council Directive 96 26 EC Text with EEA relevance THE EUROPEAN PARLIAMENT AND THE COUNCIL OF THE EURO PEAN UNION, Having regard to the Treaty establishing the European Commu nity, and in particular Article 71 1 thereof, Having regard to the proposal from the Commission, Having regard to the opinion of the European Economic and Social Committee 1   OJ C 151, 17.6.2008, p. 16.   1 , Having regard to the opinion of the European Data Protection Supervisor 2   OJ C 14, 19.1.2008, p. 1.   2 , After consulting the Committee of the Regions, Acting in accordance with the procedure laid down in Article 251 of the Treaty 3   Opinion of the European Parliament of 21 May 2008 not yet pub lished in the Official Journal , Council Common Position of 9 January 2009 OJ C 62 E, 17.3.2009, p. 1 , Position of the European Parlia ment of 23 April 2009 not yet published in the Official Journal and Council Decision of 24 September 2009.   3 , Whereas 1 The completion of an internal market in road transport with fair conditions of competition requires the uniform application of common rules on admission to the occupa tion of road haulage operator or road passenger transport operator the occupation of road transport operator . Such common rules will contribute to the achievement of a higher level of professional qualification for road transport operators, the rationalisation of the market and an improved quality of service, in the interests of road trans port operators, their customers and the economy as a whole, together with improvements in road safety. They will also facilitate the effective exercise of the right of estab lishment by road transport operators. 2 Council Directive 96 26 EC of 29 April 1996 on admis sion to the occupation of road haulage operator and road passenger transport operator and mutual recognition of diplomas, certificates and other evidence of formal quali fications intended to facilitate for these operators the right to freedom of establishment in national and international transport operations 4   OJ L 124, 23.5.1996, p. 1.   4 lays down minimum conditions governing admission to the occupation of road transport operator and the mutual recognition of the documents required in this connection. However, experience, an impact assessment and various studies show that that Directive is being applied inconsistently by Member States. Such disparities have several adverse consequences, in par ticular a distortion of competition and a lack of market transparency and of uniform monitoring, as well as the risk that undertakings employing staff with a low level of professional qualification may be negligent in respect of, or less compliant with, the rules on road safety and social wel fare, which may harm the image of the sector. 3 These consequences are all the more detrimental as they are liable to disturb the smooth functioning of the internal market in road transport, since the market in the transport of international goods and certain cabotage operations is accessible to undertakings throughout the Community. The only condition imposed on such undertakings is that they have a Community licence, which can be obtained provided they satisfy the conditions governing admission to the occupation of road transport operator laid down in Regulation EC No 1072 2009 of the European Parlia ment and of the Council of 21 October 2009 on common rules for access to the international road haulage market 5   See page 72 of this Official Journal.   5 and Regulation EC No 1073 2009 of the European Par liament and of the Council of 21 October 2009 on com mon rules for access to the international market for coach and bus services  6 . 4 It is therefore appropriate to modernise the existing rules on admission to the occupation of road transport opera tor in order to ensure that those rules are applied more uniformly and effectively. Since compliance with those rules constitutes the main condition governing access to the Community market, and the applicable Community instruments in this field are Regulations, a Regulation would appear to be the most appropriate instrument to govern admission to the occupation of road transport operator. 5 Member States should be allowed to adapt the conditions with which to comply in order to pursue the occupation of road transport operator in the outermost regions referred to in Article 299 2 of the Treaty because of the special characteristics of, and constraints in, those regions. However, the undertakings established in those regions which comply with the conditions to pursue the occupa tion of road transport operator only as a result of such adaptation should not be able to obtain a Community licence. The adaptation of the conditions to pursue the occupation of road transport operator should not hinder EN 2.1 009 1.4 1 urn .la oJlaiciff O 6 See page 88 of t sih  Official Journal of the European Union 14.11.2009 1   OJ L 281, 23.11.1995, p. 31. undertakings which would have been admitted to the occu pation of road transport operator and which comply with the general conditions laid down in this Regulation from carrying out transport operations in the outermost regions. 6 In the interests of fair competition, the common rules gov erning the exercise of the occupation of road transport operator should apply as widely as possible to all under takings. However, it is unnecessary to include within the scope of this Regulation undertakings which only perform transport operations with a very small impact on the trans port market. 7 It should be the responsibility of the Member State of establishment to verify that an undertaking satisfies at all times the conditions laid down in this Regulation so that the competent authorities of that Member State are able, if necessary, to decide to suspend or withdraw the authori sations which allow that undertaking to operate on the market. Proper compliance with, and reliable monitoring of, the conditions governing admission to the occupation of road transport operator presuppose that undertakings have an effective and stable establishment. 8 Natural persons with the requisite good repute and profes sional competence should be clearly identified and desig nated to the competent authorities. Such persons transport managers , should be resident in a Member State and effectively and continuously manage the transport activities of road transport undertakings. It is therefore appropriate to specify the conditions under which a per son is considered to effectively and continuously manage the transport activities of an undertaking. 9 The good repute of transport managers is conditional on their not having been convicted of a serious criminal offence or not having incurred a penalty, for a serious infringement, in particular, of Community rules relating to road transport. A conviction or penalty incurred by a transport manager or a road transport undertaking in one or more Member States for the most serious infringements of Community rules should result in the loss of good repute provided that the competent authority has ascer tained that a duly completed and documented investiga tion procedure granting essential procedural rights took place before its final decision and that appropriate rights of appeal were respected. 10 It is necessary for road transport undertakings to have a minimum financial standing to ensure their proper launch ing and administration. A bank guarantee or a professional liability insurance may constitute a simple and cost efficient method of demonstrating the financial standing of undertakings. 11 A high level of professional qualification should increase the socioeconomic efficiency of the road transport sector. It is therefore appropriate that applicants for the post of transport manager should possess high quality profes sional knowledge. In order to ensure greater uniformity of examinations and to promote a high quality of training, it is appropriate to provide that Member States may autho rise examination and training centres according to criteria to be defined by them. Transport managers should possess the requisite knowledge for managing both national and international transport operations. The list of subjects of which knowledge is required in order to obtain a certifi cate of professional competence and the procedures for the organisation of examinations are likely to evolve with tech nical progress, and provision should be made for updating them. It should be possible for Member States to exempt from the examinations persons who can provide proof of continuous experience in managing transport activities. 12 Fair competition and road transport that is fully compliant with the rules call for a uniform level of monitoring by Member States. The national authorities responsible for monitoring undertakings and the validity of their authori sations have a crucial role to play in this respect, and it is appropriate to ensure that they take suitable measures if necessary, in particular in the most serious cases by sus pending or withdrawing authorisations or declaring as unsuitable transport managers who are repeatedly negli gent or who act in bad faith. This must be preceded by due consideration of the measure with respect to the propor tionality principle. An undertaking should, however, be warned in advance and should have a reasonable period of time within which to rectify the situation before incurring such penalties. 13 Better organised administrative cooperation between Member States would improve the effectiveness of the monitoring of undertakings operating in several Member States and would reduce administrative costs in the future. Electronic registers of undertakings interconnected throughout the Community, which comply with the Com munity rules on the protection of personal data, would facilitate such cooperation and reduce the costs involved in checks for both undertakings and administrations. National registers already exist in several Member States. Infrastructure has also been set up with a view to promot ing interconnection between Member States. A more sys tematic use of electronic registers could therefore make a significant contribution to reducing the administrative costs of checks and to improving their effectiveness. 14 Some data contained in national electronic registers con cerning infringements and penalties are personal. Member States should therefore take the measures necessary to ensure compliance with Directive 95 46 EC of the Euro pean Parliament and of the Council of 24 October 1995 on the protection of individuals with regard to the process ing of personal data and on the free movement of such data 1   OJ L 281, 23.11.1995, p. 31.   1 , in particular with regard to the monitoring of the EN L 300 52  Official Journal of the European Union L 300 53 processing of personal data by public authorities, the right of data subjects to be provided with information, their right of access and their right to object. For the purposes of this Regulation, it would appear to be necessary to retain such data for at least 2 years to ensure that disqualified undertakings do not establish themselves in other Member States. 15 In order to improve transparency and to allow the client of a transport undertaking to verify whether that undertak ing is in possession of the appropriate authorisation, cer tain data contained in the national electronic register should be made publicly accessible, in so far as the relevant provisions on data protection are complied with. 16 It is essential to gradually interconnect national electronic registers so as to enable information to be exchanged rap idly and efficiently between Member States and to guaran tee that road transport operators are not tempted to commit, or to take the risk of committing, serious infringe ments in Member States other than their Member State of establishment. Interconnection of this kind entails the joint definition of the precise format of the data to be exchanged and the technical procedures for the exchange of that data. 17 In order to ensure the efficient exchange of information between Member States, national contact points should be designated and certain common procedures relating as a minimum to time limits and the nature of the information to be forwarded, should be specified. 18 In order to facilitate freedom of establishment, the produc tion of appropriate documents issued by a competent authority in the Member State where the transport man ager used to reside should be accepted as sufficient proof of good repute for admission to the occupation of road transport operator in the Member State of establishment, provided that the persons concerned have not been declared unfit to pursue that occupation in other Member States. 19 With regard to professional competence, in order to facili tate freedom of establishment, a single model certificate issued in accordance with this Regulation should be regarded as sufficient proof by the Member State of establishment. 20 Closer monitoring of the application of this Regulation at Community level is required. This presupposes the for warding to the Commission of regular reports, drawn up on the basis of national registers, on the good repute, financial standing and professional competence of under takings in the road transport sector. 21 Member States should provide for penalties applicable to infringements of this Regulation. Such penalties should be effective, proportionate and dissuasive. 22 Since the objective of this Regulation, namely the moderni sation of the rules governing admission to the occupation of road transport operator in order to ensure that those rules are applied more uniformly and effectively in the Member States, cannot be sufficiently achieved by the Member States and can therefore by reason of the scale and effects of the action be better achieved at Community level, the Community may adopt measures, in accordance with the principle of subsidiarity as set out in Article 5 of the Treaty. In accordance with the principle of proportional ity, as set out in that Article, this Regulation does not go beyond what is necessary to achieve that objective. 23 The measures necessary for the implementation of this Regulation should be adopted in accordance with Council Decision 1999 468 EC of 28 June 1999 laying down the procedures for the exercise of implementing powers con ferred on the Commission 1   OJ L 184, 17.7.1999, p. 23.   1 . 24 In particular, the Commission should be empowered to draw up a list of categories, types and degrees of serious ness of infringements leading to the loss of good repute of road transport operators, to adapt to technical progress Annexes  I, II and  III to this Regulation concerning the knowledge to be taken into consideration for the recogni tion of professional competence by the Member States and the model certificate of professional competence, and to draw up a list of infringements which in addition to those set out in Annex IV to this Regulation may lead to the loss of good repute. Since those measures are of general scope and are designed to amend non essential elements of this Regulation, inter alia, by supplementing it with new non essential elements, they must be adopted in accordance with the regulatory procedure with scrutiny provided for in Article 5a of Decision 1999 468 EC. 25 Directive 96 26 EC should be repealed, HAVE ADOPTED THIS REGULATION CHAPTER I GENERAL PROVISIONS Article 1 Subject matter and scope 1. This Regulation governs admission to, and the pursuit of, the occupation of road transport operator. 2. This Regulation shall apply to all undertakings established in the Community which are engaged in the occupation of road transport operator. It shall also apply to undertakings which intend to engage in the occupation of road transport operator. References to undertakings engaged in the occupation of road transport operator shall, as appropriate, be considered to include a reference to undertakings intending to engage in such occupation. EN 2.1 009 1 1.4  Official Journal of the European Union 14.11.2009 3. As regards the regions referred to in Article 299 2 of the Treaty, the Member States concerned may adapt the conditions to be complied with in order to pursue the occupation of road trans port operator, in so far as operations are fully carried out in those regions by undertakings established there. 4. By way of derogation from paragraph  2, this Regulation shall, unless otherwise provided for in national law, not apply to a undertakings engaged in the occupation of road haulage operator solely by means of motor vehicles or combinations of vehicles the permissible laden mass of which does not exceed 3,5 tonnes. Member States may, however, lower this limit for all or some categories of road transport operations b undertakings engaged in road passenger transport services exclusively for non commercial purposes or which have a main occupation other than that of road passenger transport operator c undertakings engaged in the occupation of road transport operator solely by means of motor vehicles with a maximum authorised speed not exceeding 40 km h. 5. Member States may exempt from the application of all or some of the provisions of this Regulation only those road trans port operators engaged exclusively in national transport opera tions having only a minor impact on the transport market because of a the nature of the goods carried or b the short distances involved. Article 2 Definitions For the purposes of this Regulation 1. the occupation of road haulage operator means the activity of any undertaking transporting goods for hire or reward by means either of motor vehicles or combinations of vehicles 2. the occupation of road passenger transport operator means the activity of any undertaking operating, by means of motor vehicles so constructed and equipped as to be suitable for carrying more than nine persons, including the driver, and intended for that purpose, passenger transport services for the public or for specific categories of users in return for pay ment by the person transported or by the transport organiser 3. the occupation of road transport operator means the occu pation of road passenger transport operator or the occupa tion of road haulage operator 4. undertaking means any natural person, any legal person, whether profit making or not, any association or group of persons without legal personality, whether profit making or not, or any official body, whether having its own legal per sonality or being dependent upon an authority having such personality, engaged in the transport of passengers, or any natural or legal person engaged in the transport of freight with a commercial purpose 5. transport manager means a natural person employed by an undertaking or, if that undertaking is a natural person, that person or, where provided for, another natural person des ignated by that undertaking by means of a contract, who effectively and continuously manages the transport activities of that undertaking 6. authorisation to pursue the occupation of road transport operator means an administrative decision which authorises an undertaking which satisfies the conditions laid down in this Regulation to pursue the occupation of road transport operator 7. competent authority means a national, regional or local authority in a Member State which, for the purpose of autho rising the pursuit of the occupation of road transport opera tor, verifies whether an undertaking satisfies the conditions laid down in this Regulation, and which is empowered to grant, suspend or withdraw an authorisation to pursue the occupation of road transport operator 8. Member State of establishment means the Member State in which an undertaking is established, regardless of whether its transport manager originates from another country. Article 3 Requirements for engagement in the occupation of road transport operator 1. Undertakings engaged in the occupation of road transport operator shall a have an effective and stable establishment in a Member State b be of good repute c have appropriate financial standing and d have the requisite professional competence. 2. Member States may decide to impose additional require ments, which shall be proportionate and non discriminatory, to be satisfied by undertakings in order to engage in the occupation of road transport operator. Article 4 Transport manager 1. An undertaking which engages in the occupation of road transport operator shall designate at least one natural person, the transport manager, who satisfies the requirements set out in Article 3 1 b and  d and who a effectively and continuously manages the transport activities of the undertaking EN L 300 54  Official Journal of the European Union L 300 55 b has a genuine link to the undertaking, such as being an employee, director, owner or shareholder or administering it, or, if the undertaking is a natural person, is that person and c is resident in the Community. 2. If an undertaking does not satisfy the requirement of pro fessional competence laid down in Article 3 1 d , the competent authority may authorise it to engage in the occupation of road transport operator without a transport manager designated in accordance with paragraph 1 of this Article, provided that a the undertaking designates a natural person residing in the Community who satisfies the requirements laid down in Article 3 1 b and  d , and who is entitled under contract to carry out duties as transport manager on behalf of the undertaking b the contract linking the undertaking with the person referred to in point  a specifies the tasks to be performed on an effec tive and continuous basis by that person, and indicates his or her responsibilities as transport manager. The tasks to be specified shall comprise, in particular, those relating to vehicle maintenance management, verification of transport contracts and documents, basic accounting, the assignment of loads or services to drivers and vehicles, and the verifica tion of safety procedures c in his or her capacity as transport manager, the person referred to in point  a may manage the transport activities of up to four different undertakings carried out with a com bined maximum total fleet of 50 vehicles. Member States may decide to lower the number of undertakings and or the size of the total fleet of vehicles which that person may man age and d the person referred to in point  a performs the specified tasks solely in the interests of the undertaking and his or her responsibilities are exercised independently of any undertak ings for which the undertaking carries out transport operations. 3. Member States may decide that a transport manager desig nated in accordance with paragraph 1 may not in addition be des ignated in accordance with paragraph  2, or may only be so designated in respect of a limited number of undertakings or a fleet of vehicles that is smaller than that referred to in paragraph 2 c . 4. The undertaking shall notify the competent authority of the transport manager or managers designated. CHAPTER II CONDITIONS TO BE MET TO SATISFY THE REQUIREMENTS LAID DOWN IN ARTICLE 3 Article 5 Conditions relating to the requirement of establishment In order to satisfy the requirement laid down in Article 3 1 a , an undertaking shall, in the Member State concerned a have an establishment situated in that Member State with premises in which it keeps its core business documents, in particular its accounting documents, personnel management documents, documents containing data relating to driving time and rest and any other document to which the compe tent authority must have access in order to verify compliance with the conditions laid down in this Regulation. Member States may require that establishments on their territory also have other documents available at their premises at any time b once an authorisation is granted, have at its disposal one or more vehicles which are registered or otherwise put into cir culation in conformity with the legislation of that Member State, whether those vehicles are wholly owned or, for example, held under a hire purchase agreement or a hire or leasing contract c conduct effectively and continuously with the necessary administrative equipment its operations concerning the vehicles mentioned in point  b and with the appropriate technical equipment and facilities at an operating centre situ ated in that Member State. Article 6 Conditions relating to the requirement of good repute 1. Subject to paragraph 2 of this Article, Member States shall determine the conditions to be met by undertakings and trans port managers in order to satisfy the requirement of good repute laid down in Article 3 1 b . In determining whether an undertaking has satisfied that require ment, Member States shall consider the conduct of the undertak ing, its transport managers and any other relevant person as may be determined by the Member State. Any reference in this Article to convictions, penalties or infringements shall include convic tions, penalties or infringements of the undertaking itself, its transport managers and any other relevant person as may be determined by the Member State. EN 2.1 009 1 1.4  Official Journal of the European Union 14.11.2009 The conditions referred to in the first subparagraph shall include at least the following a that there be no compelling grounds for doubting the good repute of the transport manager or the transport undertak ing, such as convictions or penalties for any serious infringe ment of national rules in force in the fields of i commercial law ii insolvency law iii pay and employment conditions in the profession iv road traffic v professional liability vi trafficking in human beings or drugs and b that the transport manager or the transport undertaking have not in one or more Member States been convicted of a seri ous criminal offence or incurred a penalty for a serious infringement of Community rules relating in particular to i the driving time and rest periods of drivers, working time and the installation and use of recording equipment ii the maximum weights and dimensions of commercial vehicles used in international traffic iii the initial qualification and continuous training of drivers iv the roadworthiness of commercial vehicles, including the compulsory technical inspection of motor vehicles v access to the market in international road haulage or, as appropriate, access to the market in road passenger transport vi safety in the carriage of dangerous goods by road vii the installation and use of speed limiting devices in cer tain categories of vehicle viii driving licences ix admission to the occupation x animal transport. 2. For the purposes of point  b of the third subparagraph of paragraph 1 a where the transport manager or the transport undertaking has in one or more Member States been convicted of a seri ous criminal offence or incurred a penalty for one of the most serious infringements of Community rules as set out in Annex  IV, the competent authority of the Member State of establishment shall carry out in an appropriate and timely manner a duly completed administrative procedure, which shall include, if appropriate, a check at the premises of the undertaking concerned. The procedure shall determine whether, due to specific cir cumstances, the loss of good repute would constitute a dis proportionate response in the individual case. Any such finding shall be duly reasoned and justified. If the competent authority finds that the loss of good repute would constitute a disproportionate response, it may decide that good repute is unaffected. In such case, the reasons shall be recorded in the national register. The number of such deci sions shall be indicated in the report referred to in Article 26 1 . If the competent authority does not find that the loss of good repute would constitute a disproportionate response, the conviction or penalty shall lead to the loss of good repute b the Commission shall draw up a list of categories, types and degrees of seriousness of serious infringements of Commu nity rules which, in addition to those set out in Annex IV, may lead to the loss of good repute. Member States shall take into account information on those infringements, including information received from other Member States, when set ting the priorities for checks pursuant to Article 12 1 . Those measures, designed to amend non essential elements of this Regulation by supplementing it and which relate to this list, shall be adopted in accordance with the regulatory procedure with scrutiny referred to in Article 25 3 . To this end, the Commission shall i lay down the categories and types of infringement which are most frequently encountered ii define the degree of seriousness of infringements accord ing to their potential to create a risk of fatalities or seri ous injuries and iii provide the frequency of occurrence beyond which repeated infringements shall be regarded as more seri ous, by taking into account the number of drivers used for the transport activities managed by the transport manager. 3. The requirement laid down in Article  3 1 b shall not be satisfied until a rehabilitation measure or any other measure hav ing an equivalent effect has been taken pursuant to the relevant provisions of national law. EN L 300 56  Official Journal of the European Union L 300 57 Article 7 Conditions relating to the requirement of financial standing 1. In order to satisfy the requirement laid down in Article 3 1 c , an undertaking shall at all times be able to meet its financial obligations in the course of the annual accounting year. To this end, the undertaking shall demonstrate, on the basis of annual accounts certified by an auditor or a duly accredited per son, that, every year, it has at its disposal capital and reserves totalling at least EUR 9 000 when only one vehicle is used and EUR 5 000 for each additional vehicle used. For the purposes of this Regulation, the value of the euro in the currencies of Member States which do not participate in the third stage of the economic and monetary union shall be fixed every year. The rates to be applied shall be those obtained on the first working day of October and published in the Official Journal of the European Union. They shall have effect from 1 January of the fol lowing calendar year. The accounting items referred to in the first subparagraph shall be understood as those defined in Fourth Council Directive 78 660 EEC of 25  July 1978 based on Article  54 3 g of the Treaty on the annual accounts of certain types of companies 1   OJ L 222, 14.8.1978, p. 11.   1 . 2. By way of derogation from paragraph  1, the competent authority may agree or require that an undertaking demonstrate its financial standing by means of a certificate such as a bank guarantee or an insurance, including a professional liability insur ance from one or more banks or other financial institutions, including insurance companies, providing a joint and several guarantee for the undertaking in respect of the amounts specified in the first subparagraph of paragraph 1. 3. The annual accounts referred to in paragraph  1, and the guarantee referred to in paragraph 2, which are to be verified, are those of the economic entity established in the Member State in which an authorisation has been applied for and not those of any other entity established in any other Member State. Article 8 Conditions relating to the requirement of professional competence 1. In order to satisfy the requirement laid down in Article  3 1 d , the person or persons concerned shall possess knowledge corresponding to the level provided for in Part I of Annex  I in the subjects listed therein. That knowledge shall be demonstrated by means of a compulsory written examination which, if a Member State so decides, may be supplemented by an oral examination. Those examinations shall be organised in accor dance with Part II of Annex I. To this end, Member States may decide to impose training prior to the examination. 2. The persons concerned shall sit the examination in the Member State in which they have their normal residence or the Member State in which they work. Normal residence shall mean the place where a person usually lives, that is for at least 185 days in each calendar year, because of personal ties which show close links between that person and the place where he is living. However, the normal residence of a person whose occupational ties are in a different place from his personal ties and who, con sequently, lives in turn in different places situated in two or more Member States, shall be regarded as being in the place of his per sonal ties, provided that such person returns there regularly. This last condition shall not be required where the person is living in a Member State in order to carry out a task of a definite duration. Attendance at a university or school shall not imply transfer of normal residence. 3. Only the authorities or bodies duly authorised for this pur pose by a Member State, in accordance with criteria defined by it, may organise and certify the written and oral examinations referred to in paragraph 1. Member States shall regularly verify that the conditions under which those authorities or bodies orga nise the examinations are in accordance with Annex I. 4. Member States may duly authorise, in accordance with cri teria defined by them, bodies to provide applicants with high quality training to prepare them for the examinations and transport managers with continuous training to update their knowledge if they wish to do so. Such Member States shall regu larly verify that these bodies at all times fulfil the criteria on the basis of which they were authorised. 5. Member States may promote periodic training on the sub jects listed in Annex I at 10 year intervals to ensure that transport managers are aware of developments in the sector. 6. Member States may require persons who possess a certifi cate of professional competence, but who have not managed a road haulage undertaking or a road passenger transport under taking in the last 5 years, to undertake retraining in order to update their knowledge regarding the current developments of the legislation referred to in Part I of Annex I. 7. A Member State may exempt the holders of certain higher education qualifications or technical education qualifications issued in that Member State, specifically designated to this end and entailing knowledge of all the subjects listed in Annex I from the examination in the subjects covered by those qualifications. The exemption shall only apply to those sections of Part I of Annex I for which the qualification covers all subjects listed under the heading of each section. A Member State may exempt from specified parts of the exami nations holders of certificates of professional competence valid for national transport operations in that Member State. EN 2.1 009 1 1.4  Official Journal of the European Union 14.11.2009 8. A certificate issued by the authority or body referred to in paragraph 3 shall be produced as proof of professional compe tence. That certificate shall not be transferable to any other per son. It shall be drawn up in accordance with the security features and the model certificate set out in Annexes II and III and shall bear the seal of the duly authorised authority or body which issued it. 9. The Commission shall adapt Annexes I, II and III to techni cal progress. Those measures, designed to amend non essential elements of this Regulation, shall be adopted in accordance with the regulatory procedure with scrutiny referred to in Article 25 3 . 10. The Commission shall encourage and facilitate the exchange of experience and information between Member States, or through any body it may designate, concerning training, examinations and authorisations. Article 9 Exemption from examination Member States may decide to exempt from the examinations referred to in Article 8 1 persons who provide proof that they have continuously managed a road haulage undertaking or a road passenger transport undertaking in one or more Member States for the period of 10 years before 4 December 2009. CHAPTER III AUTHORISATION AND MONITORING Article 10 Competent authorities 1. Each Member State shall designate one or more competent authorities to ensure the correct implementation of this Regula tion. Those competent authorities shall be empowered to a examine applications made by undertakings b grant authorisations to engage in the occupation of road transport operator, and suspend or withdraw such authorisations c declare a natural person to be unfit to manage the transport activities of an undertaking in the capacity of transport manager d carry out the requisite checks to verify whether an undertak ing satisfies the requirements laid down in Article 3. 2. The competent authorities shall publish all the conditions laid down pursuant to this Regulation, any other national provi sions, the procedures to be followed by interested applicants and the corresponding explanations. Article 11 Examination and registration of applications 1. A transport undertaking which complies with the require ments laid down in Article 3 shall, upon application, be autho rised to engage in the occupation of road transport operator. The competent authority shall ascertain that an undertaking which submits an application satisfies the requirements laid down in that Article. 2. The competent authority shall record in the national elec tronic register referred to in Article 16 the data relating to under takings which it authorises and which are referred to in points  a to  d of the first subparagraph of Article 16 2 . 3. The time limit for the examination of an application for authorisation by a competent authority shall be as short as pos sible and shall not exceed 3 months from the date on which the competent authority receives all documents necessary to assess the application. The competent authority may extend this time limit for one additional month in duly justified cases. 4. Until 31  December 2012, the competent authority shall verify, in case of any doubt when assessing the good repute of an undertaking, whether at the time of application the designated transport manager or managers are declared, in one of the Mem ber States, unfit to manage the transport activities of an under taking pursuant to Article 14. From 1  January 2013, when assessing the good repute of an undertaking, the competent authority shall verify, by accessing the data referred to in point  f of the first subparagraph of Article 16 2 , either by direct secure access to the relevant part of the national registers or by request, whether at the time of the application the designated transport manager or managers are declared, in one of the Member States, unfit to manage the trans port activities of an undertaking pursuant to Article 14. Measures designed to amend non essential elements of this Regu lation and relating to a postponement for a maximum of 3 years of the dates referred to in this paragraph shall be adopted in accordance with the regulatory procedure with scrutiny referred to in Article 25 3 . 5. Undertakings with an authorisation to engage in the occu pation of road transport operator shall, within a period of 28 days or less, as determined by the Member State of establishment, notify the competent authority which granted the authorisation of any changes to the data referred to in paragraph 2. Article 12 Checks 1. Competent authorities shall monitor whether undertakings which they have authorised to engage in the occupation of road transport operator continue to fulfil the requirements laid down in Article 3. To that end, Member States shall carry out checks tar geting those undertakings which are classed as posing an increased risk. For that purpose, Member States shall extend the risk classification system established by them pursuant to Article 9 of Directive 2006 22 EC of the European Parliament and of the Council of 15  March 2006 on minimum conditions for the EN L 300 58  Official Journal of the European Union L 300 59 implementation of Council Regulations EEC No  3820 85 and  EEC No  3821 85 concerning social legislation relating to road transport activities 1   OJ L 102, 11.4.2006, p. 35.   1 to cover all infringements specified in Article 6 of this Regulation. 2. Until 31  December 2014, Member States shall carry out checks at least every 5 years to verify that undertakings fulfil the requirements laid down in Article 3. Measures designed to amend non essential elements of this Regu lation and relating to a postponement of the date referred to in the first subparagraph shall be adopted in accordance with the regulatory procedure with scrutiny referred to in Article 25 3 . 3. Member States shall carry out individual checks to verify whether an undertaking meets the conditions governing admis sion to the occupation of road transport operator whenever the Commission so requests in duly motivated cases. It shall inform the Commission of the results of such checks and of the measures taken if it is established that the undertaking no longer fulfils the requirements laid down in this Regulation. Article 13 Procedure for the suspension and withdrawal of authorisations 1. Where a competent authority establishes that an undertak ing runs the risk of no longer fulfilling the requirements laid down in Article 3, it shall notify the undertaking thereof. Where a com petent authority establishes that one or more of those require ments is no longer satisfied, it may set one of the following time limits for the undertaking to rectify the situation a a time limit not exceeding 6 months, which may be extended by 3 months in the event of the death or physical incapacity of the transport manager, for the recruitment of a replace ment transport manager where the transport manager no longer satisfies the requirement as to good repute or profes sional competence b a time limit not exceeding 6 months where the undertaking has to rectify the situation by demonstrating that it has an effective and stable establishment c a time limit not exceeding 6 months where the requirement of financial standing is not satisfied, in order to demonstrate that that requirement will again be satisfied on a permanent basis. 2. The competent authority may require an undertaking whose authorisation has been suspended or withdrawn to ensure that its transport managers have passed the examinations referred to in Article 8 1 prior to any rehabilitation measure being taken. 3. If the competent authority establishes that the undertaking no longer satisfies one or more of the requirements laid down in Article 3, it shall suspend or withdraw the authorisation to engage in the occupation of road transport operator within the time lim its referred to in paragraph 1 of this Article. Article 14 Declaration of unfitness of the transport manager 1. Where a transport manager loses good repute in accordance with Article 6, the competent authority shall declare that trans port manager unfit to manage the transport activities of an undertaking. 2. Unless and until a rehabilitation measure is taken in accor dance with the relevant provisions of national law, the certificate of professional competence, referred to in Article  8 8 , of the transport manager declared to be unfit, shall no longer be valid in any Member State. Article 15 Decisions of the competent authorities and appeals 1. Negative decisions taken by the competent authorities of the Member States pursuant to this Regulation, including the rejec tion of an application, the suspension or withdrawal of an exist ing authorisation and a declaration of unfitness of a transport manager, shall state the reasons on which they are based. Such decisions shall take account of available information con cerning infringements committed by the undertaking or the trans port manager which are such as to detract from the good repute of the undertaking and of any other information at the disposal of the competent authority. They shall specify the rehabilitation measures applicable in the event of the suspension of an autho risation or a declaration of unfitness. 2. Member States shall take steps to ensure that the undertak ings and persons concerned have the possibility of appealing the decisions referred to in paragraph 1 to at least one independent and impartial body or a court of law. CHAPTER IV SIMPLIFICATION AND ADMINISTRATIVE COOPERATION Article 16 National electronic registers 1. For the purposes of the implementation of this Regulation, and in particular Articles 11 to 14 and Article 26 thereof, each Member State shall keep a national electronic register of road transport undertakings which have been authorised by a compe tent authority designated by it to engage in the occupation of road transport operator. The data contained in that register shall be processed under the supervision of a public authority designated for that purpose. The relevant data contained in the national elec tronic register shall be accessible to all the competent authorities of the Member State in question. By 31 December 2009, the Commission shall adopt a Decision on minimum requirements for the data to be entered in the national electronic register from the date of its setting up in order to facilitate the future interconnection of registers. It may recom mend the inclusion of the vehicle registration marks in addition to the data referred to in paragraph 2. EN 2.1 009 1 1.4  Official Journal of the European Union 14.11.2009 2. National electronic registers shall contain at least the follow ing data a the name and legal form of the undertaking b the address of its establishment c the names of the transport managers designated to meet the conditions as to good repute and professional competence or, as appropriate, the name of a legal representative d the type of authorisation, the number of vehicles it covers and, where appropriate, the serial number of the Community licence and of the certified copies e the number, category and type of serious infringements, as referred to in Article 6 1 b , which have resulted in a con viction or penalty during the last 2 years f the name of any person declared to be unfit to manage the transport activities of an undertaking, as long as the good repute of that person has not been re established pursuant to Article 6 3 , and the rehabilitation measures applicable. For the purposes of point  e , Member States may, until 31 Decem ber 2015, choose to include in the national electronic register only the most serious infringements set out in Annex IV. Member States may choose to keep the data referred to in points  e and  f of the first subparagraph in separate registers. In such a case, the relevant data shall be available upon request or directly accessible to all the competent authorities of the Member State in question. The requested information shall be provided within 30 working days of receipt of the request. The data referred to in points  a to  d of the first subparagraph shall be publicly accessible, in accordance with the relevant provisions on personal data protection. In any case, the data referred to in points  e and  f of the first subparagraph shall only be accessible to authorities other than the competent authorities where they are duly endowed with powers relating to supervision and the imposition of penalties in the road transport sector and their officials are sworn to, or otherwise are under a formal obligation of, secrecy. 3. Data concerning an undertaking whose authorisation has been suspended or withdrawn shall remain in the national elec tronic register for 2 years from the expiry of the suspension or the withdrawal of the licence, and shall thereafter be immediately removed. Data concerning any person declared to be unfit for the occupa tion of road transport operator shall remain in the national elec tronic register as long as the good repute of that person has not been re established pursuant to Article 6 3 . Where such a reha bilitation measure or any other measure having an equivalent effect is taken, the data shall be immediately removed. The data referred to in the first and second subparagraphs shall specify the reasons for the suspension or withdrawal of the autho risation or the declaration of unfitness, as appropriate, and the corresponding duration. 4. Member States shall take all necessary measures to ensure that all the data contained in the national electronic register is kept up to date and is accurate, in particular the data referred to in points  e and  f of the first subparagraph of paragraph 2. 5. Without prejudice to paragraphs  1 and  2, Member States shall take all necessary measures to ensure that the national elec tronic registers are interconnected and accessible throughout the Community through the national contact points defined in Article  18. Accessibility through national contact points and interconnection shall be implemented by 31 December 2012 in such a way that a competent authority of any Member State is able to consult the national electronic register of any Member State. 6. Common rules concerning the implementation of para graph 5, such as the format of the data exchanged, the technical procedures for electronic consultation of the national electronic registers of the other Member States and the promotion of the interoperability of these registers with other relevant databases, shall be adopted by the Commission in accordance with the advi sory procedure referred to in Article 25 2 and for the first time before 31 December 2010. Those common rules shall determine which authority is responsible for access to data and further use and updating of data after access and, to this effect, shall include rules on data logging and data monitoring. 7. Measures designed to amend non essential elements of this Regulation and relating to a postponement of the time limits referred to in paragraphs 1 and 5 shall be adopted in accordance with the regulatory procedure with scrutiny referred to in Article 25 3 . Article 17 Protection of personal data With regard to the application of Directive 95 46 EC, Member States shall ensure in particular that a all persons are informed when data relating to them is recorded or is planned to be forwarded to third parties. The information provided shall specify the identity of the author ity responsible for processing the data, the type of data pro cessed and the reasons for such action b all persons have a right of access to data relating to them held by the authority responsible for processing those data. That right shall be exercisable without constraint, at reasonable intervals and without excessive delay or cost for the applicant c all persons whose data are incomplete or inaccurate have the right to have those data rectified, erased or blocked EN L 300 60  Official Journal of the European Union L 300 61 d all persons have the right to oppose, on compelling legiti mate grounds, the processing of data relating to them. Where there is justified opposition, the processing may no longer involve those data e undertakings comply, where applicable, with the relevant provisions on the protection of personal data. Article 18 Administrative cooperation between Member States 1. Member States shall designate a national contact point responsible for the exchange of information with the other Mem ber States with regard to the application of this Regulation. Mem ber States shall forward to the Commission the names and addresses of their national contact points by 4 December 2011. The Commission shall draw up a list of all contact points and for ward it to the Member States. 2. Member States which exchange information in the frame work of this Regulation shall use the national contact points des ignated pursuant to paragraph 1. 3. Member States which exchange information on the infringe ments referred to in Article  6 2 or on transport managers declared to be unfit shall comply with the procedure and time limits referred to in Article  13 1 of Regulation EC No 1072 2009 or, as appropriate, Article 23 1 of Regulation EC No 1073 2009. A Member State which receives notification of a serious infringement which has resulted in a conviction or a pen alty in another Member State shall record that infringement in its national electronic register. CHAPTER V MUTUAL RECOGNITION OF CERTIFICATES AND OTHER DOCUMENTS Article 19 Certificates of good repute and equivalent documents 1. Without prejudice to Article  11 4 , the Member State of establishment shall accept as sufficient proof of good repute for admission to the occupation of road transport operator the pro duction of an extract from a judicial record or, failing that, an equivalent document issued by a competent judicial or adminis trative authority in the Member State where the transport man ager or any other relevant person used to reside. 2. Where a Member State imposes on its own nationals cer tain conditions relating to good repute, and proof that these con ditions are met cannot be provided by means of the document referred to in paragraph 1, that Member State shall accept as suf ficient proof for nationals of other Member States a certificate issued by a competent judicial or administrative authority in the Member State s where the transport manager or any other rel evant person used to reside stating that these conditions have been met. Such certificate shall relate to the specific information taken into consideration in the Member State of establishment. 3. If the document referred to in paragraph 1 or the certificate referred to in paragraph  2 has not been issued by the Member State s where the transport manager or any other relevant per son used to reside, that document or certificate may be replaced by a declaration on oath or by a solemn declaration made by the transport manager or any other relevant person before a compe tent judicial or administrative authority or, where appropriate, before a notary in the Member State where the transport manager or any other relevant person used to reside. Such authority or notary shall issue a certificate authenticating the declaration on oath or the solemn declaration. 4. A document referred to in paragraph  1 and a certificate referred to in paragraph 2 shall not be accepted if produced more than 3 months after their date of issue. This condition shall also apply to a declaration made in accordance with paragraph 3. Article 20 Certificates relating to financial standing Where a Member State imposes on its nationals certain conditions relating to financial standing in addition to those set out in Article 7, that Member State shall accept as sufficient proof for nationals of other Member States a certificate issued by a compe tent authority in the Member State s where the transport man ager or any other relevant person used to reside stating that these conditions have been met. Such certificate shall relate to the spe cific information taken into consideration in the new Member State of establishment. Article 21 Certificates of professional competence 1. Member States shall recognise as sufficient proof of profes sional competence a certificate which complies with the model certificate set out in Annex III and which is issued by the author ity or body duly authorised for that purpose. EN 2.1 009 1 1.4  Official Journal of the European Union 14.11.2009 2. A certificate issued before 4  December 2011 as proof of professional competence pursuant to the provisions in force until that date shall be deemed to be equivalent to a certificate which complies with the model certificate set out in Annex III and shall be recognised as proof of professional competence in all Member States. Member States may require that holders of certificates of professional competence valid only for national transport pass the examinations, or parts of the examinations, referred to in Article 8 1 . CHAPTER VI FINAL PROVISIONS Article 22 Penalties 1. Member States shall lay down the rules on penalties appli cable to infringements of the provisions of this Regulation, and shall take all the measures necessary to ensure that they are imple mented. The penalties provided for shall be effective, proportion ate and dissuasive. Member States shall notify those provisions to the Commission by 4 December 2011 at the latest and shall notify it without delay of any subsequent amendment affecting them. Member States shall ensure that all such measures are applied without discrimination as to the nationality or place of establish ment of the undertaking. 2. The penalties referred to in paragraph  1 shall include, in particular, suspension of the authorisation to engage in the occu pation of road transport operator, withdrawal of such authorisa tion and a declaration of unfitness of the transport manager. Article 23 Transitional provisions Undertakings which before 4 December 2009 have an authorisa tion to engage in the occupation of road transport operator shall comply with the provisions of this Regulation by 4  December 2011. Article 24 Mutual assistance The competent authorities of the Member States shall cooperate closely and shall give each other mutual assistance for the pur poses of applying this Regulation. They shall exchange informa tion on convictions and penalties for any serious infringements, and other specific information liable to have consequences for the pursuit of the occupation of road transport operator, in compli ance with the provisions applicable to the protection of personal data. Article 25 Committee procedure 1. The Commission shall be assisted by the Committee set up by Article  18 1 of Council Regulation EEC No  3821 85 of 20 December 1985 on recording equipment in road transport 1   OJ L 370, 31.12.1985, p. 8.   1 . 2. Where reference is made to this paragraph, Articles 3 and 7 of Decision 1999 468 EC shall apply, having regard to the pro visions of Article 8 thereof. 3. Where reference is made to this paragraph, Article  5a 1 to  4 and Article 7 of Decision 1999 468 EC shall apply, having regard to the provisions of Article 8 thereof. Article 26 Reporting 1. Every 2 years, Member States shall draw up a report on the activities of the competent authorities and shall forward it to the Commission. This report shall comprise a an overview of the sector with regard to good repute, finan cial standing and professional competence b the number of authorisations granted by year and by type, those suspended, those withdrawn, the number of declara tions of unfitness and the reasons on which those decisions were based c the number of certificates of professional competence issued each year d core statistics relating to the national electronic registers and their use by the competent authorities and e an overview of exchanges of information with other Mem ber States pursuant to Article 18 2 , including in particular the annual number of established infringements notified to other Member States and the replies received, as well as the annual number of requests and replies received pursuant to Article 18 3 . 2. On the basis of the reports referred to in paragraph 1, the Commission shall, every 2 years, submit a report to the European Parliament and to the Council on the pursuit of the occupation of road transport operator. That report shall contain, in particular, an assessment of the operation of the exchange of information between Member States and a review of the functioning and data contained in the national electronic registers. It shall be published at the same time as the report referred to in Article 17 of Regu lation EC No 561 2006 of the European Parliament and of the Council of 15 March 2006 on the harmonisation of certain social legislation relating to road transport 2   OJ L 102, 11.4.2006, p. 1.   2 . EN L 300 62  14.11.2009 EN Official Journal of the European Union L 300 63 Article 27 List of competent authorities Each Member State shall forward to the Commission by 4 Decem ber 2011 a list of competent authorities which it has designated to authorise the pursuit of the occupation of road transport operator and a list of the authorised authorities or bodies respon sible for organising the examinations referred to in Article 8 1 and issuing the certificates. A consolidated list of those authori ties and bodies throughout the Community shall be published by the Commission in the Official Journal of the European Union. Article 28 Communication of national measures Member States shall communicate to the Commission the text of the laws, regulations and administrative provisions which they adopt in the field governed by this Regulation no later than 30 days after their date of adoption and for the first time by 4 December 2011. Article 29 Repeal Directive 96 26 EC is hereby repealed. Article 30 Entry into force This Regulation shall enter into force on the 20th day following its publication in the Official Journal of the European Union. It shall apply with effect from 4 December 2011. This Regulation shall be binding in its entirety and directly applicable in all Member States. Done at Strasbourg, 21 October 2009. For the European Parliament The President J. BUZEK For the Council The President C. MALMSTRÖM  Official Journal of the European Union 14.11.2009 ANNEX I I.  LIST OF SUBJECTS REFERRED TO IN ARTICLE 8 The knowledge to be taken into consideration for the official recognition of professional competence by Member States must cover at least the subjects listed below for road haulage and road passenger transport respectively. In relation to these subjects, applicant road haulage and road passenger transport operators must have the levels of knowledge and practical aptitude necessary for the management of a transport undertaking. The minimum level of knowledge, as indicated below, may not be below level 3 of the training level structure laid down in the Annex to Council Decision 85 368 EEC 1   Council Decision 85 368 EEC of 16 July 1985 on the comparability of vocational training qualifications between the Member States of the European Community OJ L 199, 31.7.1985, p. 56 .   1 , namely the level of knowledge acquired during the course of com pulsory education, which is supplemented either by vocational training and supplementary technical training or by sec ondary school or other technical training. A.  Civil law The applicant must, in particular, in relation to road haulage and passenger transport 1. be familiar with the main types of contract used in road transport and with the rights and obligations arising therefrom 2. be capable of negotiating a legally valid transport contract, notably with regard to conditions of carriage in relation to road haulage 3. be able to consider a claim by his principal regarding compensation for loss of or damage to goods during transportation or for their late delivery, and to understand how such a claim affects his contractual liability 4. be familiar with the rules and obligations arising from the CMR Convention on the Contract for the Interna tional Carriage of Goods by Road in relation to road passenger transport 5. be able to consider a claim by his principal regarding compensation for injury to passengers or damage to their baggage caused by an accident during transportation, or regarding compensation for delays, and to under stand how such a claim affects his contractual liability. B.  Commercial law The applicant must, in particular, in relation to road haulage and passenger transport 1. be familiar with the conditions and formalities laid down for plying the trade, the general obligations incum bent upon transport operators registration, record keeping, etc. and the consequences of bankruptcy 2. have appropriate knowledge of the various forms of commercial companies and the rules governing their con stitution and operation. C.  Social law The applicant must, in particular, in relation to road haulage and passenger transport, be familiar with the following 1. the role and function of the various social institutions which are concerned with road transport trade unions, works councils, shop stewards, labour inspectors, etc. 2. the employers social security obligations EN L 300 64  Official Journal of the European Union L 300 65 3. the rules governing work contracts for the various categories of worker employed by road transport under takings form of the contracts, obligations of the parties, working conditions and working hours, paid leave, remuneration, breach of contract, etc. 4. the rules applicable to driving time, rest periods and working time, and in particular the provisions of Regu lation EEC No 3821 85, Regulation EC No 561 2006, Directive 2002 15 EC of the European Parliament and of the Council 1   Directive 2002 15 EC of the European Parliament and of the Council of 11 March 2002 on the organisation of the working time of per sons performing mobile road transport activities OJ L 80, 23.3.2002, p. 35 .   1 and Directive 2006 22 EC, and the practical measures for applying those provisions and 5. the rules applicable to the initial qualification and continuous training of drivers, and in particular those deriv ing from Directive 2003 59 EC of the European Parliament and of the Council 2   Directive 2003 59 EC of the European Parliament and of the Council of 15 July 2003 on the initial qualification and periodic training of drivers of certain road vehicles for the carriage of goods or passengers OJ L 226, 10.9.2003, p. 4 .   2 . D.  Fiscal law The applicant must, in particular, in relation to road haulage and passenger transport, be familiar with the rules governing 1. value added tax VAT on transport services 2. motor vehicle tax 3. the taxes on certain road haulage vehicles and tolls and infrastructure user charges 4. income tax. E.  Business and financial management of the undertaking The applicant must, in particular, in relation to road haulage and passenger transport 1. be familiar with the laws and practices regarding the use of cheques, bills of exchange, promissory notes, credit cards and other means or methods of payment 2. be familiar with the various forms of credit bank credit, documentary credit, guarantee deposits, mortgages, leasing, renting, factoring, etc. and the charges and obligations arising therefrom 3. know what a balance sheet is, how it is set out and how to interpret it 4. be able to read and interpret a profit and loss account 5. be able to assess the undertaking s profitability and financial position, in particular on the basis of financial ratios 6. be able to prepare a budget 7. be familiar with the cost elements of the undertaking fixed costs, variable costs, working capital, depreciation, etc. , and be able to calculate costs per vehicle, per kilometre, per journey or per tonne 8. be able to draw up an organisation chart relating to the undertaking s personnel as a whole and to organise work plans, etc. 9. be familiar with the principles of marketing, publicity and public relations, including transport services, sales promotion and the preparation of customer files, etc. 10. be familiar with the different types of insurance relating to road transport liability, accidental injury life insurance, non life and luggage insurance and the guarantees and obligations arising therefrom 11. be familiar with the applications of electronic data transmission in road transport in relation to road haulage EN 2.1 009 1 1.4  Official Journal of the European Union 14.11.2009 12. be able to apply the rules governing the invoicing of road haulage services and know the meaning and impli cations of Incoterms 13. be familiar with the different categories of transport auxiliaries, their role, their functions and, where appro priate, their status in relation to road passenger transport 14. be able to apply the rules governing fares and pricing in public and private passenger transport 15. be able to apply the rules governing the invoicing of road passenger transport services. F.  Access to the market The applicant must, in particular, in relation to road haulage and passenger transport, be familiar with the following 1. the occupational regulations governing road transport for hire or reward, industrial vehicle rental and subcon tracting, and in particular the rules governing the official organisation of the occupation, admission to the occu pation, authorisations for intra Community and extra Community road transport operations, inspections and penalties 2. the rules for setting up a road transport undertaking 3. the various documents required for operating road transport services and the introduction of checking proce dures to ensure that the approved documents relating to each transport operation, and in particular those relat ing to the vehicle, the driver, the goods and luggage are kept both in the vehicle and on the premises of the undertaking in relation to road haulage 4. the rules on the organisation of the market in road haulage services, as well as the rules on freight handling and logistics 5. border formalities, the role and scope of T documents and TIR carnets, and the obligations and responsibilities arising from their use in relation to road passenger transport 6. the rules on the organisation of the market in road passenger transport 7. the rules for introducing road passenger transport services and the drawing up of transport plans. G.  Technical standards and technical aspects of operation The applicant must, in particular, in relation to road haulage and passenger transport 1. be familiar with the rules concerning the weights and dimensions of vehicles in the Member States and the pro cedures to be followed in the case of abnormal loads which constitute an exception to these rules 2. be able to choose vehicles and their components chassis, engine, transmission system, braking system, etc. in accordance with the needs of the undertaking 3. be familiar with the formalities relating to the type approval, registration and technical inspection of these vehicles 4. understand what measures must be taken to reduce noise and to combat air pollution by motor vehicle exhaust emissions 5. be able to draw up periodic maintenance plans for the vehicles and their equipment in relation to road haulage EN L 300 66  Official Journal of the European Union L 300 67 6. be familiar with the different types of cargo handling and loading devices tailboards, containers, pallets, etc. and be able to introduce procedures and issue instructions for loading and unloading goods load distribution, stacking, stowing, blocking and chocking, etc. 7. be familiar with the various techniques of piggy back and roll on roll off combined transport 8. be able to implement procedures to comply with the rules on the carriage of dangerous goods and waste, nota bly those arising from Directive 2008 68 EC 1   Directive 2008 68 EC of the European Parliament and of the Council of 24 September 2008 on the inland transport of dangerous goods OJ L 260, 30.9.2008, p. 13 .   1 and Regulation EC No 1013 2006 2   Regulation EC No  1013 2006 of the European Parliament and of the Council of 14  June 2006 on shipments of waste OJ  L  190, 12.7.2006, p. 1 .   2 9. be able to implement procedures to comply with the rules on the carriage of perishable foodstuffs, notably those arising from the Agreement on the International Carriage of Perishable Foodstuffs and on the Special Equipment to be used for such Carriage ATP 10. be able to implement procedures to comply with the rules on the transport of live animals. H.  Road safety The applicant must, in particular, in relation to road haulage and passenger transport 1. know what qualifications are required for drivers driving licence, medical certificates, certificates of fitness, etc. 2. be able to take the necessary steps to ensure that drivers comply with the traffic rules, prohibitions and restric tions in force in different Member States speed limits, priorities, waiting and parking restrictions, use of lights, road signs, etc. 3. be able to draw up instructions for drivers to check their compliance with the safety requirements concerning the condition of the vehicles, their equipment and cargo, and concerning preventive measures to be taken 4. be able to lay down procedures to be followed in the event of an accident and to implement appropriate pro cedures to prevent the recurrence of accidents or serious traffic offences 5. be able to implement procedures to properly secure goods and be familiar with the corresponding techniques in relation to road passenger transport 6. have elementary knowledge of the layout of the road network in the Member States. II.  ORGANISATION OF THE EXAMINATION 1. Member States will organise a compulsory written examination which they may supplement by an optional oral examination to establish whether applicant road transport operators have achieved the required level of knowl edge in the subjects listed in Part I and in particular their capacity to use the instruments and techniques relating to those subjects and to fulfil the corresponding executive and coordination duties. a The compulsory written examination will involve two tests, namely i written questions consisting of either multiple choice questions each with four possible answers , ques tions requiring direct answers or a combination of both systems ii written exercises case studies. The minimum duration of each test will be two hours. b Where an oral examination is organised, Member States may stipulate that participation is subject to the suc cessful completion of the written examination. EN 2.1 009 1 1.4  L 300 68 EN Official Journal of the European Union 14.11.2009 2. Where Member States also organise an oral examination, they must provide, in respect of each of the three tests, for a weighting of marks of a minimum of 25  and a maximum of 40  of the total number of marks to be given. Where Member States organise only a written examination, they must provide, in respect of each test, for a weight ing of marks of a minimum of 40  and a maximum of 60  of the total number of marks to be given. 3. With regard to all the tests, applicants must obtain an average of at least 60  of the total number of marks to be given, achieving in any given test not less than 50  of the total number of marks possible. In one test only, a Mem ber State may reduce that mark from 50  to 40  .  14.11.2009 EN Official Journal of the European Union L 300 69 ANNEX II Security features of the certificate of professional competence The certificate must have at least two of the following security features a hologram, special fibres in the paper which become visible under UV light, at least one microprint line printing visible only with a magnifying glass and not reproduced by photocopying machines , tactile characters, symbols or patterns, double numbering serial number and issue number, a security design background with fine guilloche patterns and rainbow printing.  Official Journal of the European Union 14.11.2009 ANNEX III Model of the certificate of professional competence EUROPEAN COMMUNITY Colour Pantone stout fawn, format DIN A 4 cellulose paper 100 g m2 or more Text in the official language s or one of the official languages of the Member State issuing the certificate Distinguishing sign of the Member State concerned 1   The distinguishing signs of the Member States are B Belgium, BG Bulgaria, CZ Czech Republic, DK Denmark, D Germany, EST Estonia, IRL Ireland, GR Greece, E Spain, F France, I Italy, CY Cyprus, LV Latvia, LT Lithuania, L Luxembourg, H Hungary, M Malta, NL Netherlands, A Austria, PL Poland, P Portugal, RO Romania, SLO Slovenia, SK Slovakia, FIN Finland, S Sweden, UK United Kingdom.   1 Name of the authorised authority or body 2   Authority or body designated in advance for this purpose by each Member State of the European Community to issue this certificate.   2 CERTIFICATE OF PROFESSIONAL COMPETENCE IN ROAD HAULAGE PASSENGER TRANSPORT 3   Delete as appropriate.   3 No We hereby certify that 4   Surname and forename place and date of birth.   4 born on in has successfully passed the tests for the examination year session 5   Identification of the examination.   5 necessary for the award of the certificate of professional competence in road haulage passenger transport 3   Delete as appropriate.   3 in accordance with Regulation EC No 1071 2009 of the European Parliament and of the Council of 21 October 2009 establishing common rules concerning the conditions to be complied with to pursue the occupation of road transport operator 6   OJ L 300, 14.11.2009, p. 51   6 . This certificate constitutes the sufficient proof of professional competence referred to in Article  21 of Regulation EC No 1071 2009. Issued at , on 7   Seal and signature of the authorised authority or body issuing the certificate.   7 EN L 300 70  14.11.2009 EN Official Journal of the European Union L 300 71 ANNEX IV Most serious infringements for the purposes of Article 6 2 a 1. a Exceeding the maximum 6 day or fortnightly driving time limits by margins of 25  or more. b Exceeding, during a daily working period, the maximum daily driving time limit by a margin of 50  or more without taking a break or without an uninterrupted rest period of at least 4,5 hours. 2. Not having a tachograph and or speed limiter, or using a fraudulent device able to modify the records of the recording equipment and or the speed limiter or falsifying record sheets or data downloaded from the tachograph and or the driver card. 3. Driving without a valid roadworthiness certificate if such a document is required under Community law and or driving with a very serious deficiency of, inter alia, the braking system, the steering linkages, the wheels tyres, the suspension or chassis that would create such an immediate risk to road safety that it leads to a decision to immobilise the vehicle. 4. Transporting dangerous goods that are prohibited for transport or transporting such goods in a prohibited or non approved means of containment or without identifying them on the vehicle as dangerous goods, thus endangering lives or the environment to such extent that it leads to a decision to immobilise the vehicle. 5. Carrying passengers or goods without holding a valid driving licence or carrying by an undertaking not holding a valid Community licence. 6. Driving with a driver card that has been falsified, or with a card of which the driver is not the holder, or which has been obtained on the basis of false declarations and or forged documents. 7. Carrying goods exceeding the maximum permissible laden mass by 20  or more for vehicles the permissible laden weight of which exceeds 12 tonnes, and by 25  or more for vehicles the permissible laden weight of which does not exceed 12 tonnes. 