 CSIRO ENTERPRISE AGREEMENT 2020 2023   CSIRO Enterprise Agreement 2020 2023 ii   CSIRO Enterprise Agreement 2020 2023 iii Contents PART A. TECHNICAL MATTERS 1 1. TITLE 1 2. DATE OF OPERATION AND DURATION 1 3. PARTIES COVERED 1 4. SCOPE OF THE AGREEMENT 1 5. DEFINITIONS 1 6. CONTEXT OF THIS AGREEMENT 2 7. RENEWAL OF AGREEMENT 3 8. EXISTING CONDITIONS 3 9. ANTI DISCRIMINATION 3 PART B. APPOINTMENT AND EMPLOYMENT 3 10. TYPES OF EMPLOYMENT 3 11. MARKET RELATED EMPLOYMENT 4 12. INDIVIDUAL FLEXIBILITY ARRANGEMENTS 4 13. WORK CLASSIFICATION STANDARDS 5 14. CASUAL EMPLOYMENT 6 15. TERMINATION OF EMPLOYMENT 6 16. ADVERTISEMENT OF VACANCIES 7 17. MEDICAL ASSESSMENTS 7 PART C. REMUNERATION AND ALLOWANCES 7 18. RATES OF PAY 7 19. RECOVERY OF OVERPAYMENTS 8 20. CSIRO TRAINEESHIPS AND APPRENTICESHIPS 8 21. FLEXIBLE REMUNERATION PACKAGING 9 22. SUPERANNUATION 10 23. OVERTIME 11 24. ENHANCED RESPONSIBILITIES ALLOWANCE ERA 13 25. FIRST AID ALLOWANCE 14 26. RESTRICTION DUTY 14 27. SHIFT DUTY 16 28. DIVING ALLOWANCE 17 29. FIELD WORK 17 30. REMOTE LOCALITIES CONDITIONS 18 31. AUSTRALIAN CENTRE FOR DISEASE PREPAREDNESS ACDP 20 32. TRAVEL 21 33. EXCESS TRAVELLING TIME 23 34. SUPPORTED WAGE SYSTEM 23 PART D. CAREER DEVELOPMENT, PERFORMANCE AND REWARDS 26 35. PERFORMANCE CULTURE 26 36. ANNUAL PERFORMANCE AGREEMENT APA 26 37. CAREER MANAGEMENT, LEARNING AND DEVELOPMENT 27 38. REWARD ASSESSMENT PROCEDURES 28 39. MERIT PROMOTION 28 40. SUPERIOR PERFORMANCE RATING 29 41. PERFORMANCE CASH REWARDS 30 42. NON CASH RECOGNITION REWARDS 31 43. ASSISTANCE WITH STUDIES 31   CSIRO Enterprise Agreement 2020 2023 iv PART E. STAFF PARTICIPATION 32 44. MANAGEMENT ACCOUNTABILITY 32 45. BUREAUCRACY 32 46. SUPPORTING INNOVATION AND CREATIVITY 32 47. SUSTAINABILITY 32 48. INDIGENOUS EMPLOYMENT STRATEGY 32 49. COMMERCIALISATION 33 50. HEALTH AND SAFETY REPRESENTATIVES 33 51. EQUITY CONTACT OFFICERS 33 52. MORAL RIGHTS 33 53. STAFF PARTICIPATION AND CONSULTATION 34 54. FREEDOM OF ASSOCIATION 37 55. REPRESENTATIVES 37 56. COLLEAGUE OFFICER 37 PART F. PUBLIC HOLIDAYS AND LEAVE 37 57. PUBLIC HOLIDAYS 37 58. DOMESTIC FAMILY VIOLENCE AND ABUSE SUPPORT 38 59. LONG SERVICE LEAVE 38 60. DEFENCE LEAVE 38 61. ANNUAL SHUT DOWN 39 62. MISCELLANEOUS LEAVE. 39 63. VOLUNTARY EMERGENCY MANAGEMENT ACTIVITIES 40 64. COMPASSIONATE LEAVE 40 65. JURY LEAVE 40 66. MATERNITY AND PARENTAL LEAVE 40 67. LEAVE WITHOUT PAY 42 68. SICK AND CARER S LEAVE 42 69. RECREATION LEAVE 44 PART G. BALANCING WORK AND PERSONAL LIFE 46 70. PART TIME JOB SHARE ARRANGEMENTS 46 71. RETURN FROM LENGTHY ABSENCES 47 72. CHILDCARE 47 73. FACILITIES FOR NURSING PARENTS 47 74. WORKING AWAY FROM BASE 47 75. FLEXIBLE WORKING HOURS FLEXTIME. 48 76. AVERAGING PAY OVER A REDUCED WORKING YEAR 50 77. PHASED RETIREMENT OF MATURE AGED STAFF 50 PART H. MOBILITY OF STAFF 51 78. PERMANENT RELOCATION 51 79. ACCOMMODATION CHANGES 52 PART I. DISPUTE PROCEDURES.. 53 80. REVIEW OF DECISIONS TO TERMINATE EMPLOYMENT 53 81. RESOLUTION OF DISPUTES 53 82. WORKPLACE ISSUES RESOLUTION PROCEDURE 54 PART J. SCHEDULES TO AGREEMENT 55 SCHEDULE 1 MANAGEMENT OF UNDERPERFORMANCE 55 SCHEDULE 2 SPECIFIED TERM EMPLOYMENT 57 SCHEDULE 3 REDEPLOYMENT AND RETRENCHMENT 62   CSIRO Enterprise Agreement 2020 2023 v SCHEDULE 4 DUTY AT SEA 69 SCHEDULE 5 CLASSIFICATION LEVEL DESCRIPTORS 71 SCHEDULE 6 CSIRO SALARY SCALES Rates include annual leave loading 74    CSIRO Enterprise Agreement 2020 2023 1 PART A. TECHNICAL MATTERS 1. TITLE This Agreement will be known as the CSIRO Enterprise Agreement 2020 2023. 2. DATE OF OPERATION AND DURATION This Agreement is made pursuant to section 182 of the Fair Work Act 2009. This Agreement comes into operation on the day after the nominal expiry date of the CSIRO Enterprise Agreement 2017 2020 or seven days after it is approved by the Fair Work Commission, whichever is the later. The nominal expiry date of this Agreement will be three years from the date of commencement. 3. PARTIES COVERED In accordance with section 53 of the Fair Work Act 2009, this Agreement covers The CSIRO Chief Executive, on behalf of CSIRO All CSIRO Officers other than senior executives who are members of the Executive Team and officers covered by the CSIRO Canberra Deep Space Communication Complex CDSCC Enterprise Agreement 2018 2021 AG2018 6866 or any successor Agreement covering employees at the Canberra Deep Space Communication Complex, Tidbinbilla, as approved by the Fair Work Commission and Subject to a decision of the Fair Work Commission, those unions approved to be covered by the Agreement. 4. SCOPE OF THE AGREEMENT This Agreement operates to the exclusion of all previously applicable Agreements or Awards certified under the Industrial Relations Act 1988, Workplace Relations Act 1996 and the Fair Work Act 2009. 5. DEFINITIONS APA means Annual Performance Agreement. Attendance Bandwidth CSIRO will set an attendance bandwidth, in consultation with officers and their representatives, at each workplace of 10 hours duration between the hours of 6 a.m. and 6 p.m. on a Monday to Friday. The attendance bandwidth and commencing and finishing times may differ for different categories of officers. CSIRO means the Commonwealth Scientific and Industrial Research Organisation. Senior Manager means a person appointed to the role of Senior Executive, Business Unit Director, Facilities Director and Director of CSIRO Services or an Enterprise Services group. Delegate means a person holding an authority delegated to them under the CSIRO authorities framework.   CSIRO Enterprise Agreement 2020 2023 2 immediate family member means a spouse or former spouse partner or former partner child, parent, grandparent, grandchild or sibling of the officer or a child, parent, grandparent, grandchild or sibling of a spouse, former spouse, partner or former partner of the officer. Officer means a person appointed under Section 32 of the Science and Industry Research Act 1949, as amended. Partner means a person who ordinarily lives with the officer in a couple relationship whether that includes intersex, same or opposite sex partners on a permanent and bona fide domestic basis. Representative means a person nominated by staff to represent their views and interests to management including a union workplace delegate and, except where otherwise stated, includes officials of unions that are parties covered by this Agreement. Union means an organisation registered under the Fair Work Act 2009. 6. CONTEXT OF THIS AGREEMENT 6.1 CSIRO s mission is to deliver great science and innovative solutions for industry, society and the environment. This Agreement supports CSIRO s core purpose, role and Strategic Plan. 6.2 CSIRO s continued success is dependent on its people and its ability to provide an environment in which their creativity, diversity and innovation can flourish. The following key elements underpin all provisions in this Agreement Attracting, retaining, rewarding and motivating the right mix of highly skilled, outcome focused and team oriented people Encouraging development, learning, growth and effective utilisation of staff capabilities Celebrating outstanding contributions by individuals and teams through meaningful awards and rewards Providing competitive salaries that recognise officers contributions and achievements Providing a healthy, safe and inclusive work environment Treating people equitably and with respect Encouraging and fostering effective communication processes and productive work relationships Facilitating a reasonable balance between work and personal responsibilities. 6.3 This Agreement provides the cultural and operational foundation needed to achieve CSIRO s strategic goals. 6.4 Consistent with CSIRO s Code of Conduct, all officers are expected to perform their duties with professionalism and integrity and behave at all times in a manner that upholds CSIRO s reputation. This includes compliance with all applicable laws and regulations and with CSIRO policies, standards and procedures.   CSIRO Enterprise Agreement 2020 2023 3 7. RENEWAL OF AGREEMENT This Agreement shall operate until it is replaced, varied or terminated in accordance with the Fair Work Act 2009. 8. EXISTING CONDITIONS 8.1 This Agreement will be read and interpreted in conjunction with the National Employment Standards NES . Where there is inconsistency between this Agreement and the NES, and the NES provides greater benefit, the NES provision will apply to the extent of the inconsistency. 8.2 The operation of this Agreement is supported by policies, principles and procedures. These policies, principles and procedures do not form part of this Agreement. If there is any inconsistency between the policies, principles and procedures and the terms of this Agreement, the express terms of this Agreement will prevail. 8.3 Proposed changes affecting the conditions of employment of CSIRO officers, as expressed in the CSIRO Terms and Conditions of Service and CSIRO procedures will be subject to consultation with the parties to this Agreement and the officers covered thereby. 9. ANTI DISCRIMINATION 9.1 The parties to this Agreement are committed to providing a positive working environment through eliminating and preventing workplace discrimination and bullying and other forms of unacceptable behaviour. This includes behaviour such as direct and indirect discrimination, bullying, harassment, intimidation, threats and physical violence in the workplace. Discrimination and bullying create an unpleasant work environment, are detrimental to individual and team productivity and can affect staff health and wellbeing. This commitment is consistent with CSIRO s obligations under anti discrimination legislation and is reflected in CSIRO s Code of Conduct. 9.2 The parties to this Agreement will seek to prevent and eliminate bullying and workplace discrimination on the basis of race, colour, sex, intersex status, sexual orientation, gender identity, age, physical or mental disability, relationship or marital status, family responsibilities, pregnancy, religion, political opinion, national extraction or social origin. PART B. APPOINTMENT AND EMPLOYMENT 10. TYPES OF EMPLOYMENT 10.1 Officers shall be appointed on the basis of one of the following types of employment indefinite employment specified term employment casual employment. 10.2 Subject to Schedule 2 to this Agreement, indefinite employment will be the standard form of employment in CSIRO. 10.3 Officers in the listed types of employment may be appointed to work full time or part time hours.   CSIRO Enterprise Agreement 2020 2023 4 10.4 At the time of employment, CSIRO will inform each officer in writing of the terms of their appointment including The type of employment whether a probationary period applies and if so, the expected duration if the officer has been appointed for a specified term, the project or task in relation to which the person has been appointed and or the duration of the appointment and a list of the main instruments governing the terms and conditions of their employment 11. MARKET RELATED EMPLOYMENT 11.1 Where an officer who would otherwise be classified at CSOF Level 5.1 or above, or a CSIRO Early Research Career CERC Postdoctoral Fellow classified at CSOF Level 4, possesses skills or capabilities that are in high market demand, CSIRO may, at its discretion, offer supplementary remuneration for a specified period. 11.2 Where a market related employment arrangement concludes and an officer is to continue in employment, they will revert to the standard conditions applicable to their classification. 11.3 Disputes concerning the application of an agreed market related employment arrangement will be resolved in accordance with clause 81 of this Agreement. 11.4 Market related employment arrangements made prior to the commencement of this Agreement will, unless terminated beforehand, continue to operate until the nominated expiry date in the arrangement. 12. INDIVIDUAL FLEXIBILITY ARRANGEMENTS 12.1 CSIRO and an officer covered by this Enterprise Agreement may agree to make an individual flexibility arrangement to vary the effect of terms of the Agreement if a the Agreement deals with one or more of the following matters arrangements about when work is performed overtime rates penalty rates allowances remuneration leave part time job share arrangements return from lengthy absences working away from home base flexible working hours flextime averaging pay over a reduced working year phased retirement of mature aged staff and b the arrangement meets the genuine needs of CSIRO and an officer in relation to one or more of the matters mentioned in clause 12.1 a and   CSIRO Enterprise Agreement 2020 2023 5 c the arrangement is genuinely agreed to by CSIRO and an officer. 12.2 CSIRO must ensure that the terms of the individual flexibility arrangement a are about permitted matters under section 172 of the Fair Work Act 2009 and b are not unlawful terms under section 194 of the Fair Work Act 2009 and c result in the officer being better off overall than the officer would be if no arrangement was made. 12.3 CSIRO must ensure that the individual flexibility arrangement a is in writing and b includes the name of CSIRO and the officer and c is signed by CSIRO and the officer and if the officer is under 18 years of age, signed by a parent or guardian of the officer and d includes details of the terms of the Enterprise Agreement that will be varied by the arrangement and how the arrangement will vary the effect of the terms and how the officer will be better off overall in relation to the terms and conditions of their employment as a result of the arrangement and e states the day on which the arrangement commences. 12.4 CSIRO must give the officer a copy of the individual flexibility arrangement within 14 days after it is agreed to. 12.5 CSIRO or the officer may terminate the individual flexibility arrangement a by giving no more than 28 days written notice to the other party to the arrangement or b if CSIRO and the officer agree in writing at any time. 13. WORK CLASSIFICATION STANDARDS 13.1 The classification of CSIRO officers will be determined according to CSIRO s Work Classification Standards, which derive from the Classification Levels Descriptors that appear in Schedule 5 of this Agreement. 13.2 Work Classification Standards are to be applied in accordance with the Classification Level Descriptors and any proposed changes will be subject to consultation with the parties to this Agreement. 13.3 CSIRO recognises that National Training Packages exist and that nationally endorsed competency standards are already in place for many occupational groups. Where these endorsed training packages satisfy CSIRO s operational needs, CSIRO agrees in principle to utilise them for training and career development agreed in the context of the Annual Performance Agreement APA process thereby facilitating portability of training and skill.   CSIRO Enterprise Agreement 2020 2023 6 14. CASUAL EMPLOYMENT 14.1 A casual officer shall mean a person who is employed by the hour and paid on an hourly basis to cover genuine temporary need, including seasonal needs. 14.2 A casual officer shall be paid for work performed inside the attendance bandwidth at an hourly rate based on the appropriate salary of one of the classification levels prescribed in Schedule 6. 14.3 In calculating the hourly rate, a 25 loading will be paid to officers appointed on a casual basis, in recognition that casuals do not have access to certain entitlements. 14.4 Casual officers are not entitled to the following paid leave except long service leave payment for public holidays not worked and allowances unless otherwise provided for elsewhere in this Agreement. 14.5 For work performed outside the attendance bandwidth, payment will be made at the rate determined in accordance with clause 14.2 without the 25 loading, plus Monday to Friday 40 Saturday, Sunday or a public holiday 100 14.6 Casual officers directed to leave work Where there is insufficient work available on any one day, and a casual officer is directed to leave work, that officer will receive payment for the hours worked and for the remainder of the previously agreed hours of work for that day. 14.7 Employment may be terminated The employment of a casual may be terminated at any time provided that the officer is entitled to receive payment for the hours the officer was appointed to work on the day the officer is advised of the termination of employment. 15. TERMINATION OF EMPLOYMENT 15.1 Resignation a All officers, other than casual officers, are required to provide a minimum of two weeks written notice of resignation. b If an officer fails to give the requisite notice under clause 15.1 a , CSIRO shall have the right to make deductions from the officer s final entitlements to the extent of the overpayment, in accordance with the requirements of the Fair Work Act 2009. c Upon an officer giving their resignation, CSIRO may elect that the officer does not work through the notice period but will pay the officer the balance of the two week notice period in lieu. d Any period of recreation leave or part thereof may be used to offset notice of resignation by the officer where mutually agreed between the officer and CSIRO. 15.2 Termination by CSIRO a CSIRO will provide the following periods of notice when terminating the employment of an officer   CSIRO Enterprise Agreement 2020 2023 7 Period of continuous service Minimum notice period Less than 1 year 1 week 1 3 years 2 weeks 3 5 years 3 weeks Over 5 years 4 weeks b Officers will receive one extra week of notice if they are over 45 years of age and have at least 2 years continuous service. c CSIRO may elect that the officer does not work through the notice period and will provide a payment in lieu of notice. d Notice is not required for termination of employment due to serious misconduct. 16. ADVERTISEMENT OF VACANCIES In other than special circumstances competitive recruitment must be used to fill all vacancies with indefinite tenure, and specified period i.e. term vacancies of 18 months duration or more which are not filled by internal transfer or redeployment. 17. MEDICAL ASSESSMENTS CSIRO may require officers to undergo medical assessments, where that request is lawful and reasonable. PART C. REMUNERATION AND ALLOWANCES 18. RATES OF PAY 18.1 Salary Rates Salary rates will be increased as follows with the rates set out in Schedule 6 to this Agreement 1st increase 2 effective 6 months from the date of commencement of this Agreement 2nd increase 2 effective 12 months from the date of commencement of this Agreement 3rd increase 2 effective 24 months from the date of commencement of this Agreement. 18.2 Commencing Salaries for Administrative and Technical Officers a The minimum commencing salary for experienced administrative and technical officers excluding trades officers will be CSOF Level 2.1. b Where a person is appointed to undertake work which requires possession of a recognised trade certificate, the minimum salary payable on commencement will be CSOF Level 2.5. However, where the officer has at least five years relevant post apprenticeship trades experience or equivalent gained though recognised   CSIRO Enterprise Agreement 2020 2023 8 post trade qualifications, the minimum salary payable on commencement will be CSOF Level 3.1. 18.3 Normal Fortnightly salary Unless otherwise agreed with the individual, officers shall be paid fortnightly in accordance with the following formula 313 Annual Salary 12 18.4 Graduate Salaries a Where a person is appointed to undertake work which requires possession of a degree, the position occupied by that individual must not be classified below CSOF Level 3 and the minimum salary payable will be CSOF Level 3.1 3 year degree or CSOF Level 3.3 4 year degree . b Where a person is appointed to undertake work which requires possession of a PhD, the position occupied by that individual must not be classified below CSOF Level 4 and the minimum salary payable will be CSOF Level 4.2, except where an appointment is made at CSOF Level 4.1 because a doctorate has been submitted but not confirmed. 18.5 Death of an officer Where an officer dies, or CSIRO has directed that an officer will be presumed to have died on a particular date, payment may be made to the dependants or partners or the legal personal representative of the former officer of an amount that would have been paid if the officer had otherwise ceased employment. 19. RECOVERY OF OVERPAYMENTS 19.1 On becoming aware of a salary overpayment to an officer, CSIRO will notify the officer and establish an agreed period in which the officer will repay the amounts owing. In the event that agreement cannot be reached on the recovery action, CSIRO shall determine reasonable arrangements for repayment having regard to the officer s personal circumstances. 19.2 Where an overpayment has not been recovered prior to an officer resigning or otherwise ceasing duty with CSIRO, CSIRO may make deductions from the officer s final entitlements to the extent of the overpayment, in accordance with the requirements of the Fair Work Act 2009. 20. CSIRO TRAINEESHIPS AND APPRENTICESHIPS 20.1 CSIRO Traineeships including Apprenticeships apply to individuals undertaking structured on the job training together with accredited courses of study. All designated Traineeship positions will detail required levels of attainment and be designed to develop the competencies and performance standards required for one of the classification levels detailed in Schedule 5 Classification Level Descriptors . 20.2 The remuneration of individuals designated as CSIRO Trainees or Apprentices will be a percentage of the salary appropriate to the classification level referred to in clause 20.3. The percentage will be determined on the basis of the level of attainment measured against the previously agreed training objectives. Acceptable levels of attainment are required in both education and application of outcomes to work.   CSIRO Enterprise Agreement 2020 2023 9 20.3 An individual undertaking a training program, which is structured to provide one or more levels of attainment, will be entitled to payment at a rate calculated by applying one of the following percentages to the salary determined in accordance with clause 20.2 a One level of attainment Level 1 commencing salary 50 b Two levels of attainment Level 1 commencing salary 50 Level 2 75 c Three levels of attainment Level 1 commencing salary 50 Level 2 70 Level 3 90 d Four levels of attainment Level 1 commencing salary 50 Level 2 62.5 Level 3 75 Level 4 90 e Four levels of attainment Apprenticeship Level 1 commencing salary 50 of CSOF Level 2.5 Level 2 62.5 of CSOF Level 2.5 Level 3 75 of CSOF Level 2.5 Level 4 90 of CSOF Level 2.5 20.4 A CSIRO Apprentice or Trainee is obliged to work in accordance with the training plan. The Apprentice or Trainee shall be deemed to be at work when attending required training. Failure to achieve the training or work objectives within the required timeframes may result in termination of the Traineeship. 20.5 Upon successful completion of both the structured on the job training and the accredited course s of study, a Trainee may be directly appointed to a position without the requirement for the position to be advertised provided that the trainee entered CSIRO through a competitive selection process and a position is available and related to the discipline of the Traineeship undertaken. 20.6 The Trainee will be appointed in accordance with CSIRO s Work Classification Standards and at the classification level and performance and development step at which the Traineeship remuneration was based. 21. FLEXIBLE REMUNERATION PACKAGING 21.1 CSIRO offers flexible remuneration arrangements on a salary sacrifice basis. The arrangements provide for packaging under conditions approved by CSIRO on the basis of no extra cost to CSIRO. Additional costs such as Fringe Benefits Tax, other taxes and administrative costs will be met by the officer as part of the arrangement.   CSIRO Enterprise Agreement 2020 2023 10 21.2 Officers who are considering remuneration packaging are encouraged to seek, at their own expense, financial advice. Where officers or their representatives arrange visits by financial advisers, these advisers may only enter the site with the prior agreement of management and may make presentations to officers at times agreed by management. 21.3 The remuneration packaging offered by CSIRO will include vehicle leasing on a salary sacrifice basis. 21.4 Where a remuneration package contains benefits wholly or partly provided by salary sacrifice, the officer s annual rate of salary, for the purposes of the Superannuation Act 1976, the Superannuation Act 1990, the Superannuation Act 2005 or any other superannuation scheme, shall be as determined under the Science and Industry Research Act 1949, provided that the officer s annual rate of salary for this purpose shall not be less than the salary rate applicable to the officer under Schedule 6 plus any allowance payable under this Agreement that would otherwise be treated as salary for the purposes of the officer s superannuation scheme. 21.5 Where an officer enters into a salary sacrifice arrangement, the officer s salary for the purposes of other terms and conditions of employment that reference an officer s salary, shall be the amount that would otherwise be treated as salary for those purposes had the salary sacrifice arrangement not been in place. 22. SUPERANNUATION 22.1 Eligible officers may elect to join the PSS accumulation plan PSSap . The PSSap is also the default superannuation scheme for eligible officers who make no election. In respect of officers who are members of the PSSap, CSIRO will pay an employer contribution to the scheme at the rate prescribed under the Superannuation Act 2005 as varied from time to time . At the time of approval of this Agreement the contribution rate is 15.4 of an officer s fortnightly contribution salary as defined in the Public Sector Superannuation Scheme . 22.2 Where an officer is not eligible to join, or remain, a member of the PSSap, CSIRO will make an employer contribution to an eligible choice fund or default scheme if they make no election , at the contribution rate equivalent to the employer contribution for PSSap for that officer, until such time as eligibility to join PSSap is established, provided that the officer is not eligible to join or remain a contributor to the CSS or PSSdb does not have a deferred or preserved CSS or PSSdb benefit is not receiving a CSS or PSSdb invalidity pension. 22.3 The default superannuation scheme for officers who are ineligible to join the PSSap, if they make no election, is AustralianSuper. 22.4 Except where clause 22.2 applies, if an officer does not join a Commonwealth scheme, CSIRO will, as required by law, pay each pay period to an eligible choice fund or to AustralianSuper if an officer makes no election , the required amount, being an amount calculated at the rate of 9.5 or such other percentage as may be prescribed by legislation from time to time in relation to ordinary time earnings or the maximum superannuation contribution base, whichever is the lower. 22.5 Choice of Fund If an officer chooses an alternative fund under the choice of fund superannuation funds legislation, CSIRO will make employer contributions to that fund provided that the fund   CSIRO Enterprise Agreement 2020 2023 11 accepts payment by fortnightly electronic funds transfer EFT using a file generated by CSIRO s payroll system. Note Clause 66 covers superannuation during periods of Maternity and Parental leave. 23. OVERTIME 23.1 An officer may, wherever it is necessary to bring up arrears of work or to meet pressure of business, be required to perform duty outside the usual hours. Every officer shall, where such requirement is reasonable, remain after the usual hours of duty to complete work considered necessary to be done on the same day. 23.2 Payment of claims for overtime shall be made only if the overtime in question was authorised by CSIRO. 23.3 The following officers are not entitled to payment for overtime officers whose salary including any allowance in the nature of salary is greater than the maximum salary for CSOF Level 4 as specified in Schedule 6 officers whose hours of attendance cannot be definitely determined such as officers whose duties comprise caretaking work and officers who do not record their attendance. 23.4 Overtime calculation The weekly hours of duty for overtime calculation will be 36 ¾ hours. Overtime will be calculated on the number of hours and minutes of overtime performed. 23.5 The following allowances are included in salary for overtime purposes Enhanced Responsibilities Allowance ERA Australian Centre for Disease Preparedness ACDP site allowance Overpaid allowance and Superior performance rating premium step . 23.6 Overtime duty and rates of pay All payments of overtime are made at the rate of payment that applies to the day in which the overtime was worked. The hourly rate of payment shall be single time for overtime performed inside the bandwidth as defined in clause 23.7 time and a half for overtime worked Monday to Friday outside the bandwidth, as defined in clause 23.7 double time for overtime worked on Saturday or Sunday where this does not form part of the ordinary hours of attendance for the week double time for overtime worked on a public holiday as defined in clause 57 , in addition to payment for the public holiday. 23.7 Attendance bandwidth   CSIRO Enterprise Agreement 2020 2023 12 CSIRO will set an attendance bandwidth, in consultation with officers and their representatives see clause 5. Definitions. 23.8 Overtime on a weekend or public holiday Where an officer is required to perform overtime duty on a weekend or public holiday, the minimum overtime payment shall be for four hours at the prescribed overtime rate. 23.9 Separate attendance Where an officer is recalled to duty the following applies Any period of separate attendance that commences outside the bandwidth or on a weekend or public holiday will be paid as overtime at the applicable rate and subject to a minimum of four hours Any period of separate attendance that commences inside the bandwidth will be subject to a four hour minimum provided that where more than one attendance is involved, this subclause will not operate to increase the payment beyond that which would apply had the officer remained on duty from commencing time of duty of one attendance to the ceasing time of duty on a subsequent attendance. Attendance will include the time spent in travelling to the place of duty and returning to the officer s usual place of residence and For the purposes of determining whether an overtime attendance is separate from other duty, meal periods shall be disregarded. 23.10 Time off in lieu of overtime Where agreed, an officer may convert an entire overtime period to an equivalent period of time off in lieu. 23.11 Minimum break between periods of work a An officer who is eligible to receive overtime payments, is entitled to a minimum break of 10 continuous hours between ceasing ordinary duty on one day and commencing their next period of ordinary duty. If an officer works so much overtime that the minimum break cannot be accommodated between two periods of ordinary duty, the officer is entitled to delay the resumption of ordinary duty until the minimum break has been taken, without loss of pay. b If the officer is directed to resume duty without having had the minimum break, the officer will be paid at the double time rate from the resumption of ordinary duty until released from duty, at which time the officer will be entitled to be absent for a continuous period of 10 hours, without loss of pay. 23.12 Restriction situations Officers performing duty in a restriction situation will be paid for that duty in accordance with clause 26. 23.13 Overtime meal allowance A meal allowance of 31.95 is payable where an officer including a casual officer, works authorised overtime and duty commences prior to a meal period and concludes after   CSIRO Enterprise Agreement 2020 2023 13 the meal period. This allowance will be adjusted to reflect the Australian Taxation Office determined rate of meal allowance published annually in July. Meal period means the following periods 7.00 a.m. 9.00 a.m. 12.00 p.m. 2.00 p.m. 6.00 p.m. 7.00 p.m. 12.00 a.m. 1.00 a.m. except where an individual or group of officers reach agreement with CSIRO to change the meal periods provided that this includes four meal periods in the 24 hour cycle. 24. ENHANCED RESPONSIBILITIES ALLOWANCE ERA Definitions management responsibilities means responsibilities for the management of staff or facilities or financial resources, or a combination of these. approved leave with pay includes all paid leave except long service leave. 24.1 An officer may be directed by CSIRO to temporarily perform duties additional to, or in substitution for, those usually associated with the officer s role. 24.2 CSIRO may approve the payment of an ERA to the officer where, for a period of no less than five working days a An officer is directed to, and temporarily performs management responsibilities which are additional to, or in substitution for, the officer s normal responsibilities and b The extra responsibilities require capability at a level in the classification structure higher than the level of the officer and CSIRO determines the changed responsibilities add significantly to the value to CSIRO of the officer s work and are the result of The temporary absence of the position s occupant or The position becoming vacant or A temporary requirement for additional assistance. 24.3 Subject to the requirements at clause 24.2, ERA shall be payable in respect of the period during which the officer performs the additional or substituted management responsibilities. Payment shall be equal to the difference between the officer s salary and a relevant higher salary, as determined by CSIRO. 24.4 An officer who has been in receipt of ERA for a period of at least 12 months may have their rate of payment varied by CSIRO to take account of performance related salary movements. 24.5 Where an officer, who at the time of proceeding on approved leave with pay, is receiving an ERA, such allowance shall continue to be paid where CSIRO agrees that the allowance would have been paid but for the grant of the leave. Where an officer takes approved leave with pay which is less than leave on full pay, the payment of an allowance shall be made on a pro rata basis.   CSIRO Enterprise Agreement 2020 2023 14 25. FIRST AID ALLOWANCE Where an officer holds a suitable qualification from St John s Ambulance, Australian Red Cross or other Registered Training Organisation, and is authorised to provide first aid services in addition to normal duties, CSIRO shall pay an allowance to the officer in accordance with the table below. The rates of allowance will be increased in line with increases to salary and from the same dates of effect. Qualification held 1st increase 2nd increase 3rd increase Minimum qualification Provide First Aid 700 p.a. 714 p.a. 728 p.a. Minimum qualification Provide Advanced First Aid 864 p.a. 881 p.a. 899 p.a. Minimum qualification Occupational First Aid or Registered Nursing qualifications where the holder is included on the Nursing Register but is not performing a full time nursing function 1055 p.a. 1076 p.a. 1098 p.a. 26. RESTRICTION DUTY 26.1 Restriction direction The Delegate may direct an officer to be contactable and remain available to perform extra duty outside that officer s normal hours of duty. 26.2 Restriction approval The restriction situation is imposed by the prior written direction of the Delegate or is subsequently approved in writing by the Delegate where the circumstances did not permit prior direction. 26.3 Categories of restriction a Close Call The officer is, or may be, required to attend for extra duty if the need arises some time before the officers next normal time of commencing duty and the officer is to remain contactable and available for immediate recall to duty and commence the return journey within five minutes of the recall and at all times be able to report for duty at the workplace within 35 minutes of the recall. In special circumstances, owing to staffing or operational reasons, an officer who cannot meet the foregoing requirements may be deemed to be in close call category if able to return to the worksite within 45 minutes from the time of recall. b On Call The officer is, or may be, required to undertake extra duty some time before the officers next normal time of commencing duty and the officer is to remain contactable and available to return to duty within a reasonable time of being recalled having regard to the consequences of any undue delay.   CSIRO Enterprise Agreement 2020 2023 15 26.4 Payment eligibility a Officers whose salary, including allowances specified in clause 26.7, is greater than CSOF Level 6.M will not be eligible to receive payment unless the Delegate specifically approves this payment. b Allowances will be calculated using the officer s annual salary, including allowances specified in clause 26.7 provided that if this salary exceeds CSOF Level 4.M, allowances will be calculated by substituting CSOF Level 4.M for the officer s annual salary in clause 26.8. 26.5 Close call payment rate An officer who is subject to close call restriction will be paid an allowance at the rate of a 7.5 of the officer s hourly rate of salary for each hour restricted Monday to Friday b 10 of the officer s hourly rate of salary for each hour restricted Saturday and Sunday and c 15 of the officer s hourly rate of salary for each hour restricted on public holidays. 26.6 On Call payment rate An officer who is subject to on call restriction will be paid an allowance at the rate of a 3.75 of the officer s hourly rate of salary for each hour restricted Monday to Friday b 5 of the officer s hourly rate of salary for each hour restricted Saturday and Sunday and c 7.5 of the officer s hourly rate of salary for each hour restricted on public holidays. 26.7 Salary rate An officer s salary for the purpose of calculation of the allowance under clauses 26.5 and 26.6 will include ERA and ACDP site allowance. 26.8 Formula The hourly rate of payment will be calculated as follows of salary prescribed above 73 5. 12 313 Annual Salary The allowance under this subclause will be payable for each hour or part hour the officer is restricted outside the officer s ordinary hours of duty. 26.9 No concurrent payment Any part of a period of restriction in respect of which the officer receives payment other than in accordance with clauses 26.5 and 26.6 will not be included in the period of restriction for calculating payments. 26.10 Availability No payment will be made to an officer for any period in which the officer does not remain contactable or at the required degree of readiness to perform extra duty.   CSIRO Enterprise Agreement 2020 2023 16 26.11 Duty payment a duty not at work where an officer who has been restricted is required to perform duty, but is not required to be recalled to work, duty payment will be made for duty worked, subject to a one hour minimum payment. b duty at work where an officer who has been restricted is recalled to duty at a place of work, payment will be made subject to a four hour minimum payment. c duty on more than one occasion where an officer is required to perform duty on more than one occasion, the minimum payment provisions of clauses 26.11 a and 26.11 b will not operate to increase the duty payment beyond that which would apply had the officer remained on duty from the commencing time of the first duty to the completion of the subsequent duty. d calculation duty payments will be calculated in accordance with clauses 23.4, 23.5 and 23.6. Where an officer s salary, including allowances specified in clause 26.7, exceeds CSOF Level 4.M, duty payment will be calculated by substituting CSOF Level 4.M for the officer s salary. e minimum break between periods of work an officer who is eligible to receive duty payment, is entitled to the minimum break provisions described in clause 23.11. 26.12 Development of Rosters Rosters for regular restriction duty should be developed in consultation with the officers involved, having regard to issues such as family responsibilities and individual circumstances. 27. SHIFT DUTY 27.1 The provisions of this clause shall not apply to officers whose hours of attendance cannot be definitely determined, such as officers whose duties comprise caretaking work, or to such other special categories of staff as may be determined by CSIRO. 27.2 Penalty rate for shift duty the following shift duty payments apply to an officer who is rostered to perform and performs ordinary duty in the following circumstances Type of shift duty Penalty Rate Duty, including duty on an alternating or rotating shift, any part of which regularly falls between the hours of 6 p.m. and 6 a.m. Monday to Friday 15 Duty on a shift falling wholly within the hours of 6 p.m. and 8 a.m. Monday to Friday over a continuous period exceeding four weeks 30 Duty between midnight on Friday and midnight on Saturday 50 Duty on Sunday 100 Duty on a public holiday 150 27.3 The additional payment prescribed in this clause shall not be taken into account in the calculation of overtime or in the determination of any allowance based upon salary, nor shall it be made with respect to any shift for which any other form of penalty payment is made. 27.4 Where an officer to whom this subclause applies performs overtime duty on a Saturday, the officer shall be paid an additional 100 of ordinary rates of pay, provided that in the   CSIRO Enterprise Agreement 2020 2023 17 case of a Saturday overtime attendance not continuous with ordinary duty, the payment so resulting shall be subject to the minimum overtime payment provisions of clause 23.8. 27.5 Additional payment for ordinary duty prescribed in this clause will be made in respect of any such duty which an officer would have performed had the officer not been on recreation leave. 27.6 Enhanced Responsibilities Allowance shall be regarded as salary for the purpose of calculating shift duty payments. 27.7 Where, in a cycle of shifts on a regular roster, an officer is required to perform rostered duty on each of the days of the week the officer shall, in respect of a holiday which occurs on a day on which the officer is rostered off duty, be granted, if practicable, within one month after the holiday, a day s leave in lieu of that holiday. If it is not practicable to grant such a day s leave, the officer shall be paid for one day at the ordinary rate of pay in lieu of time off duty. 28. DIVING ALLOWANCE 28.1 Officers who undertake diving in the course of their duties shall be eligible for payment of Diving Allowance which shall be paid using the following formula after each application number of days diving 1.2 313 CSOF 3.M Annual Salary 15 28.2 CSIRO shall provide and maintain all equipment used by officers undertaking diving in the course of their duties, unless there is a mutual agreement otherwise. 28.3 CSIRO shall provide all training necessary to maintain skills to a level consistent with safe practice for divers. 28.4 CSIRO shall reimburse any costs associated with registration or other statutory requirements for divers. 29. FIELD WORK 29.1 Field work means working away from an office or laboratory, out in the open and generally in rural or remote areas, conducting various land based activities. It often involves working long and or irregular hours. 29.2 Officers required to perform field work will be provided with adequate equipment and supplies to undertake the work, including occupational health and safety compliant suitable protective clothing and footwear, camping, first aid and communications equipment. 29.3 Officers will be expected to utilise commercial accommodation where it is available and is within reasonable commuting distance of the field site. 29.4 Expense reimbursement arrangements will apply where credit card facilities are not available and also where the field work does not involve an overnight stay. 29.5 Where field work requires overnight absence from home and credit card facilities are not available, officers including casual officers may be paid, in advance, for estimated reasonable expenses, including incidental expenses. If they are able to purchase meals, this advance will include a component for meals of 105.75 for each full day spent away   CSIRO Enterprise Agreement 2020 2023 18 from their usual place of work. A full day is one that extends from before 7 a.m. until after 7 p.m. The meal component for part days will be determined according to the meal periods that occur during that part day as follows 6 a.m. to 7 a.m. breakfast 25.75 12 p.m. to 1 p.m. lunch 29.35 6 p.m. to 7 p.m. dinner 50.65 The above allowances will be adjusted in accordance with increases determined by the Australian Taxation Office. The allowances in clauses 29.5 a and 29.5 b below will be increased in line with increases to salary and from the same dates of effect. a Officers who are not able to purchase meals, will be provided with the necessary supplies to allow them to prepare their meals at the field site. Where supplies are not provided, the advance will include an allowance for each 24 hours and part thereof, spent away from their home base, to meet the costs of stores purchased for food preparation at the camp site and meals consumed during travel to and from the field site. The rates of allowance payable will be 1st increase 2nd increase 3rd increase 49.52 50.51 51.52 b Officers who are required to camp at the field site, or who are provided accommodation lacking basic facilities e.g. hot water, electricity and kitchen , will be paid a canvas allowance per night spent in the camp. The rates of allowance payable will be 1st increase 2nd increase 3rd increase 80.27 81.88 83.52 29.6 The minor expense payment of 15.00 per day is not payable for days covered by an advance payment received by an officer in accordance with clause 29.5. 30. REMOTE LOCALITIES CONDITIONS The provisions in this clause apply to officers stationed at certain localities in recognition of particular disadvantages associated with geographic isolation. 30.1 The Accessibility Remoteness Index of Australia ARIA , compiled by the Australian Government Department of Health, is the basis on which CSIRO sites are assessed to determine eligibility for the special conditions conferred by this clause. 30.2 According to the ARIA index, current CSIRO sites that attract the district allowances specified in clause 30.3 are ARIA Category ARIA Score Locality Very Remote 9.09 12.0 Murchison Remote 5.81 9.08 Alice Springs Moderately accessible 3.51 5.80 Atherton, Narrabri, Ayr, Mossman, Woodstock 30.3 Amount of payment   CSIRO Enterprise Agreement 2020 2023 19 a A district allowance will be payable to officers stationed at the localities specified in clause 30.2. Part time officers receive a pro rata payment based on the proportion of full time hours worked. The allowances in the table will be increased in line with increases to salary and from the same dates of effect. The following allowances include a component for leave related air fares Officers without dependants ARIA Category 1st increase 2nd increase 3rd increase Very Remote 3835 p.a. 3912 p.a. 3990 p.a. Remote 3402 p.a. 3470 p.a. 3539 p.a. Moderately accessible 1593 p.a. 1625 p.a. 1658 p.a. b For officers with dependants, the rate is double that of officers without dependants. c Officers in Atherton and Alice Springs Officers who have more than one dependant will receive an additional payment for the second and for each subsequent dependant. The rate of payment shall be 500 at Atherton and 800 at Alice Springs. This payment is in lieu of airfares previously received. 30.4 For the purposes of clause 30.3 a a member of the officer s family unit will be considered to be a dependant if they normally reside with the officer at the locality and the officer indicates in writing that the person is receiving income less than the adult minimum wage and the person is a partner a student who is under 25 years and is a full time student at school, college or university a child who is under 16 years and is not a student, including an officer s partner s child, an adopted child, a foster child, a step child or a ward a child housekeeper an officer s child or partner s child of any age who works full time keeping house for the officer an invalid relative who is 16 years of age or over and receives a disability support pension or a special needs disability support pension or rehabilitation allowance, or has a certificate of invalidity from a medical practitioner, recognised by Medicare certifying continuing inability to work or an officer s parent or partner s parent. b Except as provided in clause 30.3 c , the maximum amount payable to a family unit is the equivalent of one with dependants allowance. Hence, if another member of the family unit is receiving an allowance which recognises that dependants are being supported, the CSIRO officer will be paid only the difference, if any, between the relevant with dependants rate and the amount received by that other family member. 30.5 Officers previously entitled to receive leave related air fares will retain any unused air fare entitlements that had accrued prior to 13 November 2005.   CSIRO Enterprise Agreement 2020 2023 20 30.6 Officers stationed at the localities specified in clause 30.2, are entitled to an additional two days recreation leave per annum, which will accrue on a pro rata basis for incomplete years or where officers are temporarily transferred to a relevant locality for a period exceeding one month. 30.7 Transitional Payments apply to officers located at Darwin and Townsville who are currently receiving remote localities allowance will not continue beyond an officer s employment at the current locality are subject to officers in receipt of the with dependants rate continuing to satisfy the criteria in clause 30.4. 30.8 Officers entitled to transitional payments contained in clause 30.7 will receive a non indexed allowance reflecting the value of district allowance and airfares prior to this Agreement i Townsville The value of the non indexed allowance will be Single rate 1100 p.a. Dependents rate 1200 p.a. plus 500 p.a. for the officer and each dependant. ii Darwin The value of the non indexed allowance will be Single rate 3370 p.a. Dependents rate 2880 p.a. plus 1800 p.a. for the officer and each dependant. 31. AUSTRALIAN CENTRE FOR DISEASE PREPAREDNESS ACDP 31.1 An officer, including a casual officer, employed at the ACDP, Geelong, shall be paid a site allowance at the rate specified in clause 31.7 a in recognition of the limitations placed upon officers at this site in relation to the keeping of animals. The site allowance will be increased in line with increases to salary and from the same dates of effect. 31.2 A secure allowance at the rate specified in clause 31.7 b shall be paid to officers including a casual officer required to work within the secure area of the laboratory in recognition of the limitations regarding contact with certain animals and the places such animals are kept and the unique features associated with work in the secure area. A secure area includes specific pathogen free area. This allowance shall be determined according to the number of days, including any part or parts of a single day, in the previous 12 months on which CSIRO required the officer to enter the secure area of the ACDP. This secure allowance will be increased in line with increases to salary and from the same dates of effect. 31.3 Automated card readers on the secure side of the shower areas shall be used to record entry to establish the officer s level of entitlement for secure allowance and secure leave. The secure allowance entitlement shall be calculated annually as at 30 June and paid in the second pay period following. The site allowance shall be paid fortnightly. 31.4 In recognition of the significant lifestyle restrictions placed on officers who work in the secure area, those officers shall have access to ACDP Secure Leave ACDPSL entitlements as specified in clause 31.7 c .   CSIRO Enterprise Agreement 2020 2023 21 31.5 The accounting period for the purpose of calculating ACDPSL entitlement shall be from 1 July to 30 June the following year. Accrual shall be on a continuing basis from the commencement of the accounting period. Leave credits shall be available from the end of the calendar month in which they accrue. 31.6 ACDPSL shall be credited as additional recreation leave. 31.7 Allowances and Secure Leave a ACDP Site Allowance 1st increase 2nd increase 3rd increase ACDP Site Allowance 890 p.a. 908 p.a. 926 p.a. b ACDP Secure Allowance Number of Days in secure area 1st increase 2nd increase 3rd increase 5 40 150.55 p.a. 153.56 p.a. 156.63 p.a. 41 80 451.64 p.a. 460.67 p.a. 469.88 p.a. 81 948.29 p.a. 967.26 p.a. 986.61 p.a. Day includes part or any parts of a single day. c ACDP Secure Leave will accrue as follows Number of Days in secure area Secure Leave 5 40 0 41 80 1 81 5 Day includes part or any parts of a single day. 32. TRAVEL 32.1 Official travel should be at no personal expense or monetary gain to staff and should apply equitably and consistently throughout CSIRO. CSIRO will meet the costs of all reasonable expenses incurred in undertaking official travel. 32.2 CSIRO credit cards are the normal means of meeting travel costs and will be issued to travellers on an as needs basis. Where a credit card is provided, it is expected that all significant travel related costs such as airfares, accommodation, meals, taxis and parking station fees will be met using a credit card. 32.3 Where an officer has not been provided with a CSIRO credit card they shall have costs paid in advance where possible and may be provided with an advance representing estimated costs. Such an advance must be reconciled at the end of the trip. 32.4 Minor expense payment   CSIRO Enterprise Agreement 2020 2023 22 a To address the inconvenience involved in processing minor out of pocket expenses, a fixed payment of 15 for each 24 hour period is available for domestic travel where an officer has incurred expenses, not paid for or reimbursed by CSIRO, resulting from the travel. The rate for international travel is twice the domestic rate. b The payment is designed to cover minor expenses such as tolls, street parking, minor fares, family related telephone calls and items of a personal nature required by virtue of being away from home. It is not intended to cover main meals, accommodation, taxis or other major expenses. c When the minor expense payment is claimed, no other claims for out of pocket expenses can be made except in respect to actual costs exceeding the value of the minor expense payment. In these instances, receipts or justification must be provided. 32.5 Travel time Business related travel within the bandwidth is regarded as time on duty for the purpose of formal and informal flexible attendance arrangements. Where, prior to travel being undertaken, a Manager agrees that it is necessary for an officer to undertake business related travel within Australia outside the bandwidth, the time spent travelling will be also regarded as time on duty . 32.6 Clothing CSIRO may at its discretion reimburse officers for expenditure on the purchase and or rental of clothing that is needed because of a requirement to perform duty away from their normal place of work, in a different climatic zone. Officers may submit a claim for clothing, based on reimbursement of reasonable expenses once in any 3 year period. 32.7 Motor Vehicle Allowance Approval may be given for officers to use their private transport for official purposes in situations where it is more efficient and or less expensive for the Organisation. Where approved, the officer owning the vehicle is entitled to be paid an allowance at the rate of 0.72 per kilometre. This allowance will be adjusted annually to reflect the Australian Taxation Office determined rate. 32.8 Transporting other officers or equipment Where an officer who is entitled to receive Motor Vehicle Allowance is required to transport another person s whose fares would otherwise be met by CSIRO or equipment weighing not less than 100 kilograms which is the property of CSIRO the officer is entitled to a payment of an allowance at the rate of 0.72 per kilometre in addition to the normal Motor Vehicle Allowance, for the period during which these additional conditions apply. 32.9 Reimbursement of higher vehicle insurance and registration costs Where, as a consequence of the official use of the officer s private motor vehicle, the officer is required to pay additional vehicle insurance premiums or vehicle registration costs, the officer is entitled to reimbursement of an amount equal to the additional costs.   CSIRO Enterprise Agreement 2020 2023 23 33. EXCESS TRAVELLING TIME 33.1 For the purposes of this clause the term usual place of work shall mean a for officers who are required ordinarily to work day by day at the same fixed place of work the place so fixed by CSIRO and b for officers whose place of work is variable within a specified district a place within that district fixed by CSIRO. 33.2 An officer in receipt of a salary in excess of the salary applying to CSOF Level 2.M per annum shall not be entitled to payment for excess travelling time. 33.3 Payment will be made for time necessarily spent in travelling, exclusive of overtime duty, in excess of a the officer s ordinary hours of attendance for the day and b the time necessarily spent travelling to and from the officer s usual place of residence and the officer s usual place of work provided that in the case of officers specified in clause 33.1 b , a minimum time of 20 minutes each way shall apply. 33.4 Payment will be made at the following rates a ordinary rates of pay on Mondays to Saturdays and b time and a half rates on Sundays and public holidays. 33.5 Payment shall not be made unless the excess time exceeds a one half hour in any one day or b two and one half hours in any fortnightly pay period, in the case of an officer whose ordinary hours of attendance are confined to five days of the week or c three hours in any fortnightly pay period, in the case of an officer who performs rostered ordinary duty on six days of the week nor shall payment be made for more than five hours in any one day. 34. SUPPORTED WAGE SYSTEM 34.1 This clause defines the conditions which will apply to officers who, because of the effects of a disability, are eligible for a supported wage under the terms of this Agreement. 34.2 In this clause Approved assessor means a person accredited by the management unit established by the Commonwealth under the supported wage system to perform assessments of an individual s productive capacity within the supported wage system. Assessment instrument means the tool provided for under the supported wage system that records the assessment of the productive capacity of the person to be employed under the supported wage system. Disability support pension means the Commonwealth pension scheme to provide income security for persons with a disability as provided under the Social Security Act 1991 Cth , as amended from time to time, or any successor to that scheme.   CSIRO Enterprise Agreement 2020 2023 24 Relevant minimum wage means the minimum wage prescribed by this Agreement for the class of work for which an officer is engaged. Supported Wage System SWS means the Commonwealth Government system to promote employment for people who cannot work at full Agreement wages because of a disability, as documented in the Supported Wage System Handbook. The Handbook is available from the JobAccess website SWS wage assessment agreement means the document in the form required by the relevant Commonwealth Government department that records the employee s productive capacity and agreed wage rate. 34.3 Eligibility criteria a Officers covered by this clause will be those who are unable to perform the range of duties to the competence level required within the class for which the officer is engaged under this Agreement, because of the effects of a disability on their productive capacity and who meet the impairment criteria for receipt of a disability support pension. b This clause does not apply to any existing officer who has a claim against CSIRO which is subject to the provisions of workers compensation legislation or any provision of this Agreement relating to the rehabilitation of officers who are injured in the course of their employment. 34.4 Supported wage rates Officers to whom this clause applies shall be paid the applicable percentage of the relevant minimum wage according to the following table Assessed capacity of prescribed Agreement rate 10 10 20 20 30 30 40 40 50 50 60 60 70 70 80 80 90 90 Provided that the minimum amount payable must not be less than the current weekly rate of 89.00 which will be adjusted in accordance with increases determined by the Fair Work Commission. Where an officer s assessed capacity is 10 they must receive a high degree of assistance and support. 34.5 Assessment of capacity   CSIRO Enterprise Agreement 2020 2023 25 a For the purpose of establishing the percentage of the relevant minimum wage, the productive capacity of the officer will be assessed in accordance with the Supported Wage System by an approved assessor, having consulted CSIRO and the officer and, if the officer so desires, a union which the officer is eligible to join. b Assessment made under this clause must be documented in an SWS wage assessment agreement and retained by CSIRO as a time and wages record in accordance with the Fair Work Act 2009. 34.6 Lodgement of SWS assessment agreement a All SWS wage assessment agreements under the conditions of this clause, including the appropriate percentage of the relevant minimum wage to be paid to the officer, must be lodged by CSIRO with the Fair Work Commission. b All SWS wage assessment agreements must be agreed and signed by the officer and CSIRO. Where a union which has an interest in the Agreement is not a party to the assessment, the assessment will be referred by the Fair Work Commission to the union by certified mail and the agreement will take effect unless an objection is notified to the Fair Work Commission within 10 working days. 34.7 Review of assessment The assessment of the applicable percentage should be subject to annual review or more frequent review on the basis of a reasonable request for such a review. The process of review must be in accordance with the procedures for assessing capacity under the supported wage system. 34.8 Other terms and conditions of employment Where an assessment has been made, the applicable percentage will apply to the relevant wage rate only. Officers covered by the provisions of this clause will be entitled to the same terms and conditions of employment as all other officers covered by this Agreement, paid on a pro rata basis. 34.9 Workplace adjustment CSIRO, if wishing to employ an officer under the provisions of this clause, must take reasonable steps to make changes in the workplace to enhance the officer s capacity to do the job. Changes may involve redesign of job duties, working time arrangements and work organisation in consultation with other officers in the area. 34.10 Trial Period a In order for an adequate assessment of the officer s capacity to be made, CSIRO may employ a person under the provisions of this clause for a Trial Period not exceeding twelve weeks, except that in some cases additional work adjustment time not exceeding four weeks may be needed. b During that Trial period the assessment of capacity will be undertaken and the percentage of the relevant minimum wage for a continuing employment relationship will be determined. c The minimum amount payable to the officer during the Trial Period must be no less than the current weekly rate of 89.00 which will be adjusted in accordance with increases determined by the Fair Work Commission. d Work trials should include induction or training as appropriate to the job being trialled.   CSIRO Enterprise Agreement 2020 2023 26 e Where CSIRO and the officer wish to establish a continuing employment relationship following the completion of the Trial Period, a further contract of employment will be entered into based on the outcome of assessment under clause 34.5. PART D. CAREER DEVELOPMENT, PERFORMANCE AND REWARDS 35. PERFORMANCE CULTURE CSIRO will foster an environment in which exemplary standards of performance and behaviour of individuals and teams are recognised and rewarded through consistently applied and transparent processes. 36. ANNUAL PERFORMANCE AGREEMENT APA Note For the purposes of this clause, representative excludes union officials. 36.1 The Annual Performance Agreement APA cycle provides a framework for performance management, which facilitates effective communication of work requirements, alignment of corporate and individual goals, performance improvement, training and development requirements. The APA also provides information or evidence for performance and development steps, performance rewards and promotions. The APA cycle is a 12 month period from July to June inclusive. 36.2 CSIRO recognises the right of staff to have a colleague officer or a representative present at meetings with a supervisor or manager relating to the APA process to assist in the resolution of any issues. 36.3 Obligations to participate It is a requirement of employment in CSIRO that all officers excluding casuals and those employed for less than three months participate in the APA process. Officers who, given reasonable opportunity, fail to complete the APA process within the required timeframes, namely Review Stage 3 by 31 August and Objective Setting Stage 1 for the following year by 31 October, will not be eligible for performance rewards. 36.4 It is a requirement of managers in CSIRO to ensure that eligible officers under their supervision participate in the APA process. Managers who fail to make every effort to ensure eligible officers participate in the APA process within the required timeframes, will not be eligible for performance rewards. 36.5 Work Objectives and Performance indicators Work objectives and performance indicators are to be finalised through discussion between an officer and their manager. The agreed work objectives must be appropriate for the classification level, consistent with the Work Classification Standards and incorporate appropriate teamwork and organisational behaviours.   CSIRO Enterprise Agreement 2020 2023 27 36.6 Officers who undertake roles which have a corporate citizenship focus play an important role in maintaining a positive workplace culture. Line Managers will recognise these duties and responsibilities in the APA process. CSIRO recognises that officers perform these roles in addition to their usual duties. CSIRO, at its discretion, will provide support to officers where they are required to perform these roles. 36.7 If there is disagreement between an officer and their manager on any aspect of the APA, including the final evaluation, the next level manager should be called upon to consider the issue. If agreement cannot be reached following the next level manager s review, the matter may be referred to the next higher level manager. Within Business Units the matter can continue to be elevated until it reaches the Business Unit Leader, who will make the final decision. 36.8 Performance and Development Steps Advancement to a higher performance and development step PADS , where available, will be approved where the officer has participated in and satisfied the requirements of their APA within the required timeframe. Officers who do not satisfy these requirements are not eligible for salary advancement within their CSOF level. 36.9 Performance and Development Steps Appeals a Initially officers should discuss any concerns about their performance appraisal with their Line Manager and or next level manager in an attempt to resolve the matter. b Staff who have participated in the APA process and have been denied advancement to the next PADS within their CSOF Level may appeal to the Business Unit Leader for a reconsideration of that decision. There is no appeal against the following decisions i Denial of advancement by two or more performance and development steps ii Denial of performance and development steps resulting from disciplinary actions. c Any appeal must be lodged within 10 working days of the officer being notified that they have not received a PADS. d The appeal process shall observe the principles of natural justice and the officer will have the opportunity to provide information to the Business Unit Leader for consideration. e The decision by the Business Unit Leader to either uphold the appeal and grant a PADS, or to refuse the appeal and confirm the original decision is final. The decision and the reason for the decision, will be confirmed to the officer in writing. 37. CAREER MANAGEMENT, LEARNING AND DEVELOPMENT 37.1 CSIRO is committed to continuous learning to support our officers to reach their full potential and to enable CSIRO to successfully deliver our strategy. The parties to this Agreement believe that all officers should have the opportunity to participate in relevant learning, development, and training activities aimed at improving individual and team performance, skills and knowledge, and the effectiveness of CSIRO. 37.2 All officers will have the opportunity to participate in at least five days learning, development and or training each Annual Performance Agreement APA cycle exclusive of travel. The activity must be aligned with business and individual needs and reflected in the APA or an agreed development plan. This indicates the mutual   CSIRO Enterprise Agreement 2020 2023 28 responsibility of the officer, their Line Manager and CSIRO. It is recognised that a large number of CSIRO officers will exceed this minimum. 37.3 Learning, development and training activities should lead to the development of skills and or knowledge and may include formal program and conference participation and on the job assignments including but not limited to, e learning, webinars, networking, shadowing, coaching and or mentoring and participating in communities of practice . 38. REWARD ASSESSMENT PROCEDURES Note For the purposes of this clause, representative excludes union officials. 38.1 Cases for accelerated advancement within CSOF Level, promotions and performance cash rewards will be considered by the Reward Review Committees established within Business Units. Cases will be reviewed by the Reward Review Committee following completion of Stage 3 of the APA. 38.2 The Business Unit should, where practicable, include on its Reward Review Committee, one of its representatives and or a relevant officer from another Business Unit. 38.3 CSIRO shall provide to unsuccessful candidates for accelerated advancement and promotion, constructive feedback and advice. This advice must be provided in writing if requested by a candidate. 38.4 A list of all officers who receive accelerated advancement, promotions and performance cash rewards and the reasons for such rewards, will be published within the Business Unit. 39. MERIT PROMOTION 39.1 Merit promotion to a higher CSOF level shall be approved where, through the Reward Assessment Procedures see clause 38 , CSIRO determines that An officer has a sustained record of achievement that clearly demonstrates the requirements defined for the next CSOF level in the relevant Functional Area Work Classification Standards and CSIRO requires the role to be performed at the higher level for the foreseeable future. 39.2 Since officers will develop their roles and competencies at different rates, depending on their personal potential and the opportunities that arise in the workplace, the period over which sustained performance can be demonstrated will vary but would normally be at least two and will not be less than one full 12 month performance cycle. Where the performance is over a period less than two full cycles, the case must clearly address the candidate s capacity to sustain that level of performance beyond the period being assessed. 39.3 An officer need not be on the maximum performance and development step of their existing CSOF level to be promoted. 39.4 Where a promotion is denied on the grounds that the role is not required to be performed at the higher level for the foreseeable future , the officer will be advised in writing of the functions or activities that are no longer required to be performed and the work objectives set through the APA process will reflect this advice. 39.5 Merit Promotion to, and advancement within CSOF Level 7 and CSOF Level 8   CSIRO Enterprise Agreement 2020 2023 29 a Merit Promotion to CSOF Level 7 or CSOF Level 8 requires a reclassification case in accordance with clauses 38 and 39. b Advancement through performance and development steps within CSOF Level 7 is dependent on the officer satisfactorily meeting the work objectives agreed in the officer s Annual Performance Agreement see clause 36 . c Advancement to CSOF Level 8.2 is only available from CSOF Level 8.1 and requires a reasoned case justifying advancement. d Advancement beyond CSOF Level 8.2 requires a reclassification case satisfying the senior promotion guidelines. 39.6 Reclassification Appeal Process An officer seeking promotion up to CSOF Level 6 in any functional area or to CSOF Level 7 or 8 in the Research Science Engineering Projects or Research Consulting functional areas, may lodge a Formal Reclassification Appeal where The delegate declines to approve a reclassification The officer s immediate Line Manager declines to submit the case for consideration in the reward review process. An officer must lodge their appeal within 28 days of formal notification that the case has been unsuccessful or advice that it will not be submitted to the Reward Review Committee. 39.7 Informal Resolution Where a Reward Review Committee considers that an officer has not demonstrated a sustained record of achievement at the higher CSOF level and promotion is denied, CSIRO and the officer may agree to an informal reconsideration of the decision, which will include A review of the decision by a Senior Manager agreed by both the officer and CSIRO and A focus on a timely and expeditious review, with the objective of resolving the matter within 14 days. The informal review process will not preclude an officer or CSIRO from invoking the formal appeal process referred to in clause 39.8, prior to the conclusion of the informal review. 39.8 Formal Reclassification Appeal Process a Formal appeals will be considered by a Reclassification Appeal Committee which will provide a report and recommendations to the Business Unit Leader. The officer will have the opportunity to address the Committee. b The Business Unit Leader shall review the report by the Committee, make a decision, and inform the parties in writing within 14 days of receiving the report from the Appeal Committee. 40. SUPERIOR PERFORMANCE RATING 40.1 This reward category applies to officers at a career plateau.   CSIRO Enterprise Agreement 2020 2023 30 40.2 A Superior Performance Rating means that an officer at a career plateau has demonstrated superior achievement relative to other officers in their functional area at their current classification level in the preceding 12 months. While the officer must have significantly exceeded the objectives for that assessment period, in doing so they have not met the requirements for reclassification and it is not foreseeable that they would do so for the subsequent 12 months. 40.3 Officers at a career plateau in CSOF Levels 1 to 8 who receive a Superior Performance Rating may be awarded a special lump sum payment in July following the year of the assessment. The amount of the lump sum is equal to 7 of the officer s annual salary. 40.4 Officers at a career plateau in CSOF Levels 1 to 8 who receive a Superior Performance Rating and who do not receive a lump sum, will be placed on the premium step for their level a premium step will have the value of 107 of the annual rate at the career plateau . Placement on a premium step will be approved for 27 fortnights. At the end of that period, the officer will return to the salary point held prior to the award of the Superior Performance Rating. 40.5 Officers who have received a Superior Performance Rating are not precluded from receiving one in subsequent years, providing they again satisfy the criteria. 40.6 The Superior Performance Rating applies only to officers at a career plateau . It is not a substitute for promotion. Officers will be accepted as being at a career plateau where They have been at the maximum of their Level including 8.2 and 8.3 in the case of Level 8 for two years prior to the year in which the reward is to be paid and Reclassification is not currently appropriate or foreseeable in the subsequent 12 month period. 40.7 The names of officers who receive a Superior Performance Rating will be publicised within their Business Units in line with announcements about promotions, accelerated advancement and Performance Cash Rewards in accordance with clause 38.4. 41. PERFORMANCE CASH REWARDS 41.1 Performance Cash Rewards may be applied to teams as well as individuals. Team rewards should be fairly distributed amongst team members according to their contribution. 41.2 Performance Cash Rewards will be available where there is a case for rewarding performance but where accelerated advancement, reclassification or other reward options are not appropriate. Performance Cash Rewards are not to substitute for other rewards where the necessary eligibility criteria have been satisfied. 41.3 Officers may be nominated for a Performance Cash Reward by colleagues, Line Managers or Senior Managers. 41.4 A Reward Review Committee will consider reward nominations, including the amount and distribution within teams, and make recommendations to the Delegate. 41.5 The maximum Performance Cash Reward payable to an officer is 20,000 per annum. 41.6 Successful cases will be published in accordance with clause 38.4.   CSIRO Enterprise Agreement 2020 2023 31 42. NON CASH RECOGNITION REWARDS 42.1 These rewards may be given to individuals or teams to mark praiseworthy effort or long service where other rewards are not appropriate. 42.2 These rewards are separate from normal salary and allowance payments made to officers for their work and are not a substitute for such payments. 42.3 Officers may be nominated for a Recognition Reward by colleagues, Line Managers or Senior Managers, at any time. 42.4 Any tax in relation to a Non cash Recognition Reward will be paid by CSIRO. 42.5 A Non cash Recognition Reward cannot be converted to cash. 43. ASSISTANCE WITH STUDIES 43.1 Study leave and other forms of assistance may be granted to assist an officer with studies towards Certificates, Diplomas, Advanced Diplomas, Degrees or higher degrees, as well as relevant short courses where the course of study is in the interests of both CSIRO and the individual officer. 43.2 Assistance with studies and the level of assistance approved is at the discretion of the Delegate and may include reimbursement or payment in advance, of part or all of the costs associated with the approved course of study, including but not limited to course costs, enrolment and administration fees, tuition and examination fees, books and materials study leave with pay, up to an average of five hours per week to attend formal classes and examinations up to three hours per week for travel. 43.3 Additional Study Leave with pay of up to three hours a week may be granted where attendance at formal classes exceeds five hours a week or where travel takes more than three hours a week during working hours. 43.4 Where the period of Study Leave granted is less than the average of five hours a week, the Delegate may approve the difference as a leave credit which may be used to meet the requirements of external studies distance education courses, attendance at prescribed examinations and field trips and preparation of prescribed assignments and theses. 43.5 Study leave without pay may be also granted. This leave will count as service for all purposes, except recreation leave, provided that the officer resumes duty after the period of leave. However, whether this leave will count as service for long service leave will be determined by the delegate in accordance with the requirements of the Long Service Leave Commonwealth Employees Act 1976. 43.6 Study leave for part time officers is granted on a pro rata basis.   CSIRO Enterprise Agreement 2020 2023 32 PART E. STAFF PARTICIPATION 44. MANAGEMENT ACCOUNTABILITY CSIRO is committed to creating an environment where innovation thrives and everyone is valued and treated fairly and with respect. CSIRO managers will support the principles of Openness a free flow of information relevant to the well being of staff Transparency encouraging staff input, providing clear, reasoned justification for decisions to affected officers and providing feedback on how views are taken into account Fairness treating staff equitably and with respect and Consistency showing no favouritism in decision making. 45. BUREAUCRACY The parties to this Agreement agree to continue to work on opportunities for bureaucracy reduction and recognise the productivity and efficiency gains that can be achieved through efficient administration and organisational governance and enabling productive science and research. 46. SUPPORTING INNOVATION AND CREATIVITY The parties to this Agreement recognise that CSIRO s objectives are largely dependent on the innovation and creativity of its staff. The CSIRO rolling strategy provides emphasis on continuing to build an enhanced culture of innovation. CSIRO will report on progress and outcomes of the strategy through CSIRO Consultative Council and or forums with staff. 47. SUSTAINABILITY 47.1 The parties to this Agreement recognise that the involvement of staff including at the local level is critical in improving the environmental sustainability of CSIRO in the areas of greenhouse gas emissions, energy, water and waste. 47.2 CSIRO will provide opportunities for staff contributions toward improving the environmental sustainability of CSIRO s operations through the implementation of an Environmental Sustainability Strategy. 48. INDIGENOUS EMPLOYMENT STRATEGY 48.1 Indigenous Australians have significant contributions to make to Australia across cultural, economic and scientific domains. CSIRO recognises the social and economic disadvantage experienced by Indigenous Australians and is committed to helping close the gap between Indigenous and non Indigenous Australians. 48.2 CSIRO aims to increase employment of Indigenous Australians within its workforce through the development of a range of strategic partnerships with relevant stakeholders and implementing Indigenous employment strategies within the organisation s workforce planning.   CSIRO Enterprise Agreement 2020 2023 33 49. COMMERCIALISATION 49.1 The parties to this Agreement acknowledge that effective commercialisation of research and development outcomes are fundamental to CSIRO s future. In order to facilitate staff involvement in commercialisation activities, affected officers will be provided with timely information about their rights, entitlements and the conditions that apply, so that they are able to make an informed decision about whether or not they wish to participate. 49.2 Where CSIRO introduces a scheme allowing officers who generate intellectual property to share in the benefits of the commercialisation of that intellectual property, the affected officers and where they choose, their representatives, will be informed of the details of the scheme. The details of the scheme and its operation will be determined by CSIRO and may be varied at CSIRO s discretion. These schemes will include mechanisms for resolving disputes or grievances and therefore will not be subject to the Workplace Issues Resolution Procedure or dispute procedure contained in clause 81 of this Agreement. 50. HEALTH AND SAFETY REPRESENTATIVES 50.1 CSIRO is committed to meeting the requirements of the Work Health and Safety Act 2011 to provide a safe work environment and to promote a more safety conscious culture. The Act provides for the selection or election of Health and Safety Representatives. 50.2 Health and Safety Representatives play an important role in facilitating CSIRO s commitment. CSIRO recognises this valued role by providing reasonable time during normal working hours to undertake the role formal recognition of time spent on this role in their Annual Performance Agreement essential training and resources and the opportunity, as a member of Health and Safety Committees, to participate in the assessment of relevant awards. 51. EQUITY CONTACT OFFICERS CSIRO recognises this valued role by providing reasonable time during normal working hours to undertake the role formal recognition of time spent on this role in their Annual Performance Agreement time and encouragement to participate in essential training to enhance their effectiveness and the opportunity, where relevant, to participate in committees and the assessment of Diversity awards. 52. MORAL RIGHTS 52.1 Background   CSIRO Enterprise Agreement 2020 2023 34 a Australian copyright law provides non financial Moral Rights to authors or creators of copyright works under the Copyright Act 1968. b Moral Rights in relation to a work include i a right of attribution of authorship ii a right not to have authorship falsely attributed and iii a right of integrity of authorship which relates to derogatory treatment of a work that is prejudicial to the author s honour or reputation . c The rights of attribution and integrity of authorship are subject to extensive reasonableness tests which are set out in the Copyright Act. Moral Rights are personal to individual authors and cannot be sold or transferred. If one author of a work provides a Moral Rights Consent, the Consent would not apply to other authors of that work. d Authors who produce copyright works in the course of their employment may consent to their employer doing acts which would otherwise be a breach of their Moral Rights. The benefit of such Consent may be passed on by the employer to third parties. Moral Rights Consents may be given in respect of particular works specific or works of a particular description general including future works. Moral Rights Consents must be in writing, must be informed and are invalid if given under duress. 52.2 Moral Rights Consents from CSIRO officers a CSIRO respects the Moral Rights of its officers and recognises their significance for CSIRO s reputation as well as the reputation of its officers. CSIRO officers recognise that a number of CSIRO s clients require, as a condition of doing business with CSIRO, that they not be exposed to legal action by CSIRO officers for breach of the Moral Rights of those officers and that this will necessitate CSIRO seeking Moral Rights Consents, to facilitate business with those clients. Consequently CSIRO will not invite officers to sign Moral Rights Consents as a matter of administrative convenience Where any work is covered by a Moral Rights Consent which extends to a CSIRO client, CSIRO will use all reasonable endeavours to ensure that the client undertakes to CSIRO to i attribute authorship in scientific papers and reports to the relevant scientific author s ii subject to i above, not falsely attribute authorship of the work and iii not modify the work in such a way as to make it misleading or deceptive while the work is attributed to a CSIRO officer. b CSIRO will respect the right of an officer not to sign a Moral Rights Consent where it is offered and will not demote or discipline an officer on the ground that the officer did not provide a Moral Rights Consent. Officers recognise that if they refuse to provide a Moral Rights Consent, they may not be able to work on projects where Moral Rights Consents are required. In that event, CSIRO will take all practicable steps to provide suitable alternative work for those officers. 53. STAFF PARTICIPATION AND CONSULTATION 53.1 This term applies if CSIRO   CSIRO Enterprise Agreement 2020 2023 35 a has made a definite decision to introduce a major change to production, program, organisation, structure, or technology in relation to its enterprise that is likely to have a significant effect on officers or b proposes to introduce a change to the regular roster or ordinary hours of work of officers. Major change 53.2 For a major change referred to in clause 53.1 a a CSIRO must notify the relevant officers of the decision to introduce the major change and b clauses 53.3 to 53.9 apply. 53.3 The relevant officers may appoint a representative for the purposes of the procedures in this term. 53.4 If a a relevant officer appoints, or relevant officers appoint, a representative for the purposes of consultation and b the officer or officers advise CSIRO of the identity of the representative CSIRO must recognise the representative. 53.5 As soon as practicable after making its decision, CSIRO must a discuss with the relevant officers i the introduction of the change and ii the effect the change is likely to have on the officers and iii measures CSIRO is taking to avert or mitigate the adverse effect of the change on the officers and b for the purposes of the discussion provide, in writing, to the relevant officers i all relevant information about the change including the nature of the change proposed and ii information about the expected effects of the change on the officers and iii any other matters likely to affect the officers. 53.6 However, CSIRO is not required to disclose confidential or commercially sensitive information to the relevant officers. 53.7 CSIRO must give prompt and genuine consideration to matters raised about the major change by the relevant officers. 53.8 If a term in this Agreement provides for a major change to production, program, organisation, structure or technology in relation to the enterprise of CSIRO, the requirements set out in clause 53.2 a , 53.3 and 53.5 are taken not to apply. 53.9 In this term, a major change is likely to have a significant effect on officers if it results in a the termination of the employment of officers or   CSIRO Enterprise Agreement 2020 2023 36 b major change to the composition, operation or size of CSIRO s workforce or to the skills required of officers or c the elimination or diminution of job opportunities including opportunities for promotion or tenure or d the alteration of hours of work or e the need to retrain officers or f the need to relocate officers to another workplace or g the restructuring of jobs. Change to regular roster or ordinary hours of work 53.10 For a change referred to in clause 53.1 b a CSIRO must notify the relevant officers of the proposed change and b Clauses 53.11 to 53.15 apply. 53.11 The relevant officers may appoint a representative for the purposes of the procedures in this term. 53.12 If a a relevant officer appoints, or relevant officers appoint, a representative for the purposes of consultation and b the officer or officers advise CSIRO of the identity of the representative CSIRO must recognise the representative. 53.13 As soon as practicable after proposing to introduce the change, CSIRO must a discuss with the relevant officers the introduction of the change and b for the purposes of the discussion provide to the relevant officers i all relevant information about the change, including the nature of the change and ii information about what CSIRO reasonably believes will be the effects of the change on the officers and iii information about any other matters that CSIRO reasonably believes are likely to affect the officers and c invite the relevant officers to give their views about the impact of the change including any impact in relation to their family or caring responsibilities . 53.14 However, CSIRO is not required to disclose confidential or commercially sensitive information to the relevant officers. 53.15 CSIRO must give prompt and genuine consideration to matters raised about the change by the relevant officers. 53.16 In this term relevant officers means the officers who may be affected by a change referred to in clause 53.1.   CSIRO Enterprise Agreement 2020 2023 37 53.17 Consistent with clause 53.1 a , where CSIRO has made a definite decision to introduce major change, consultation shall occur before the major change is introduced. In other circumstances CSIRO may consult with staff and their representatives about matters that have implications for their employment or affect the way their work is to be performed. 53.18 The parties to this Agreement recognise that Consultative Council and other consultative mechanisms exist to discuss issues that may have organisation wide impact. 54. FREEDOM OF ASSOCIATION CSIRO recognises that officers are free to choose to join or not join a union. Irrespective of that choice Officers will not be discriminated against in respect of their employment under this Agreement. An individual officer s choice to be represented will be respected by all parties in the workplace. Officers who choose to be members of a union have the right to seek advice and assistance from their union and have their interests represented by that union. 55. REPRESENTATIVES Note For the purposes of this clause, representative means a CSIRO officer and excludes union officials. 55.1 An officer may have a representative, who may be a union delegate, to represent them in their industrial interests and ascertain their views on workplace issues. CSIRO and representatives will deal with each other in good faith. 55.2 The role of representatives, including union delegates and other non union representatives, is to be respected and facilitated. At its discretion, CSIRO will determine the appropriate level of support for officers who perform these roles. 56. COLLEAGUE OFFICER 56.1 CSIRO recognises the right of staff to have a colleague officer present at meetings with a supervisor or manager which address matters that relate directly to the officer s employment such as classification, performance including APA , discipline, working relationships and tenure. 56.2 A colleague officer is a CSIRO officer who may, at another officer s request, accompany that officer to a meeting with a supervisor or Manager. The colleague officer is not an advocate for the officer but may be consulted by the officer for advice or support during the meeting. The colleague officer may also contribute to discussions during the meeting in the interests of assisting the discussions. PART F. PUBLIC HOLIDAYS AND LEAVE 57. PUBLIC HOLIDAYS 57.1 The following days, or any days prescribed under the law of any State or Territory to be observed in lieu thereof in that State or Territory, shall be observed as holidays by CSIRO officers   CSIRO Enterprise Agreement 2020 2023 38 1 January New Year s Day 26 January Australia Day Easter Good Friday Easter Monday 25 April Anzac Day Queen s Birthday 25 December Christmas Day 26 December Boxing Day 57.2 In addition to the days mentioned above, additional days or part days will be observed as local public holidays where these days are declared under State or Territory law and observed by the whole of the community in that Region, State or Territory. 57.3 If under a State or Territory law, a day or part day is substituted for one of the public holidays listed above, then the substituted day or part day is the public holiday. 58. DOMESTIC FAMILY VIOLENCE AND ABUSE SUPPORT CSIRO is committed to providing a supportive, flexible and safe workplace for officers affected by domestic family violence and abuse DFVA when they need it most. CSIRO has support systems in place for officers impacted by domestic family violence and abuse including a trained network of DFVA contact officers, online resources and information on external services, access to a confidential Employee Assistance Program, flexible working arrangements which includes the ability to change locations, contact numbers, email addresses and devices. Access to paid and unpaid leave is also available to officers. 59. LONG SERVICE LEAVE 59.1 CSIRO will provide long service leave in accordance with the Long Service Leave Commonwealth Employees Act 1976. 59.2 The minimum period for which long service leave can be taken is seven calendar days at full pay or 14 calendar days at half pay per occasion with the granting of such leave subject to operational requirements. 59.3 Long service leave cannot be broken with other periods of leave except as otherwise provided by legislation. 60. DEFENCE LEAVE 60.1 An officer will be granted leave with or without pay to enable the officer to fulfil Australian Defence Force ADF Reserve and Continuous Full time Service CFTS or Cadet Force obligations. 60.2 An officer is entitled to leave with pay, of up to four weeks during each financial year, and an additional two weeks paid leave in the first year of ADF Reserve Service, for the purpose of fulfilling service in the ADF Reserve. 60.3 With the exception of the additional two weeks in the first year of service, leave can be accumulated and taken over a period of two years.   CSIRO Enterprise Agreement 2020 2023 39 60.4 An officer who is an officer or instructor of cadets in a Cadet Force may be granted paid leave of up to three weeks each financial year to perform duties as an officer or instructor of Cadets. For these purposes Cadet Force means the Australian Navy Cadets, Australian Army Cadets, or the Australian Air Force Cadets. 60.5 Defence Reserve leave counts as service for all purposes, except for unpaid leave to undertake Continuous Full time Service CFTS . Unpaid leave for the purpose of CFTS counts for all purposes except annual leave accrual. 61. ANNUAL SHUT DOWN 61.1 The first working day following the gazetted Christmas Boxing Day public holidays, except where an officer is on leave without pay, long service leave or paid maternity leave, shall be observed as a holiday by CSIRO officers. Officers observing the holiday shall be paid in accordance with their ordinary hours of work and there will be no deduction from leave credits for this day. Officers who work on this day and who meet the eligibility criteria at clause 23.3 shall be paid at double time for the hours worked, in addition to payment for the holiday. 61.2 Except where specified at clause 61.1, any site where CSIRO determines that it shall observe a shut down which includes the period between Christmas Day and New Year s Day, officers may be directed to take leave, paid or unpaid depending on the officer s accrued leave balance, for that period. Officers so directed are to use accrued recreation, flex, or miscellaneous leave subject to clause 62.6 of this Agreement. Officers who fail to apply for leave for the period, will not be paid salary for the period, instead the officer will be provided with paid miscellaneous leave, subject to available credits, during the period. Where an officer has exhausted their miscellaneous leave and recreation leave credits and they are unlikely to clear any excess flex debit as required by clause 61.3, the officer will take unpaid leave. 61.3 Officers with insufficient leave credits at the time of shut down may exceed the normal 10 hour maximum flex debit, provided that the excess debit is cleared within three months of the shut down. 61.4 Decisions on implementing shut down will be communicated no less than three months before the shut down period. Where officers are likely to have genuine work demands during the shut down period, CSIRO shall organise appropriate alternative working arrangements in the event it wishes to proceed with the shut down. 61.5 In order to meet essential operating requirements at a site, CSIRO may direct an officer to attend work during the annual shut down. An officer who is directed to work shall be permitted to access an equivalent period of miscellaneous leave during the following two months in recognition of the requirement to work during the shut down period. 62. MISCELLANEOUS LEAVE 62.1 Miscellaneous leave is intended to provide flexibility to meet an officer s personal circumstances and to provide leave during the annual shut down period. Miscellaneous leave accrues at the rate of four days per year and is subject to a maximum balance of 15 days. Officers located in Alice Springs will be subject to a maximum balance of 17 days. The entitlement for all part time officers is calculated on a pro rata basis. 62.2 The granting of miscellaneous leave is subject to the Line Manager s discretion. 62.3 Line Managers will not unreasonably refuse an application and must provide reasons for the decision where an application is refused.   CSIRO Enterprise Agreement 2020 2023 40 62.4 Line Managers may require documentary evidence to support a request for leave. 62.5 Separate Compassionate leave entitlements exist which are not subject to the above accruals. 62.6 An officer will not be eligible for miscellaneous leave during periods of other approved leave including leave without pay. 63. VOLUNTARY EMERGENCY MANAGEMENT ACTIVITIES In addition to miscellaneous leave, unpaid leave is available for officers participating in voluntary emergency management activities including leave for regular training, all emergency services responses, reasonable recovery time and ceremonial duties. 64. COMPASSIONATE LEAVE 64.1 An officer excluding a casual shall be granted up to three days paid compassionate leave on each occasion that a member of the officer s immediate family or household contracts or develops a personal illness that poses a serious threat to their life sustains a personal injury that poses a serious threat to their life or dies. 64.2 A casual officer may access up to three days of unpaid leave on each occasion that compassionate leave is required. 64.3 The granting of compassionate leave is subject to the production of suitable evidence. 65. JURY LEAVE An officer required to attend court as a juror will be granted leave of absence with pay and the leave will count as service for all purposes. 66. MATERNITY AND PARENTAL LEAVE 66.1 Maternity leave a Officers who are pregnant, or give birth, are covered by the provisions of the Maternity Leave Commonwealth Employees Act 1973 the ML Act . b The ML Act provides officers with up to 52 weeks maternity leave. For eligible officers who have completed 12 months continuous service as defined by the ML Act, up to 12 weeks of that leave is paid. Officers with an entitlement to paid leave under the ML Act are provided with an additional 6 weeks of paid parental leave, to be taken with a period of paid maternity leave provided by the ML Act. c Officers who are eligible for paid maternity leave may elect to have the payment for that leave spread over a maximum of 36 weeks at a rate of half normal salary. Where payment is spread over a period longer than 18 weeks and up to 36 weeks, a maximum of 18 weeks of the leave period will count as service. 66.2 Parental leave   CSIRO Enterprise Agreement 2020 2023 41 a Officers who adopt, foster long term or become the permanent legal guardian for a child, and who have a responsibility for the care of that child, are entitled to up to 52 weeks of parental leave. Where the officer is the primary caregiver to the child, up to 4 weeks of that leave will be paid parental leave, commencing from the time of placement of the child, provided the officer has completed 12 months continuous service. Continuous qualifying service is defined to be the same as those requirements which apply to eligibility for paid maternity leave under the ML Act. b Officers may elect to have the payment for parental leave spread over a maximum of 8 weeks at a rate no less than half normal salary. Where payment is spread over a period longer than 4 weeks, only 4 weeks of the leave period will count as service. c Officers are entitled to parental leave in accordance with this clause when the child they have responsibility for the care of i is under 16 years of age ii has not, or will not have, lived continuously with the officer for a period of 6 months or more as at the day or expected day of placement and iii is not otherwise than because of the adoption a child of the officer or the officer s spouse partner. d Documentary evidence of approval for adoption or enduring parental responsibilities under formal fostering or guardianship arrangements must be submitted when applying for parental leave for adoption, long term foster carer or permanent guardianship purposes. 66.3 Unpaid maternity and parental leave a On ending the initial period of up to 52 weeks of maternity or parental leave, officers may request an extension of unpaid parental leave for a further period of up to 52 weeks. The second period of unpaid leave is to commence immediately following the initial leave period. b Unpaid maternity or parental leave will not count as service for any purpose except for any unpaid leave taken during the first 18 weeks. 66.4 Public holidays This leave is inclusive of public holidays and will not be extended because a public holiday or annual shut down falls during a period of paid or unpaid maternity or parental leave. On ending maternity or parental leave, officers have the return to work guarantee and the right to request flexible working arrangements that are provided by the Fair Work Act 2009. 66.5 Specified term officers In the case of term officers, a period of paid or unpaid maternity or parental leave may not extend beyond the date on which their term concludes. 66.6 Partner leave a Officers who are not otherwise entitled to paid maternity leave under the ML Act or paid parental leave under this Agreement, are entitled to 4 weeks of paid partner leave on the birth, adoption, guardianship or long term foster care placement of a child or their partner s child.   CSIRO Enterprise Agreement 2020 2023 42 b Officers who have not completed 12 months service are entitled to a maximum of one week paid parental leave. Officers who complete 12 months service during the 52 week leave availability period are entitled to the balance of the leave that falls within the 52 week period. c This leave is available to be taken within 52 weeks of the birth placement of the child. d Documentary evidence must be submitted when applying for partner leave. e Paid partner leave will count as service for all purposes. Officers may elect to have the payment for partner leave spread over a maximum of 8 weeks at a rate no less than half normal salary. Where payment is spread over a period longer than 4 weeks, only 4 weeks of the leave period will count as service. 66.7 Unpaid maternity and parental leave superannuation a CSS and PSSdb where an officer is on unpaid maternity leave or parental leave and the officer elects prior to the relevant contribution day to contribute to superannuation during their absence, employer superannuation contributions will continue to be made. b PSSap employer superannuation contributions will be paid for the period of absence on unpaid maternity or parental leave. 67. LEAVE WITHOUT PAY 67.1 Leave without pay may be granted to allow officers to be absent from work for a period of unpaid leave which is in the interests of CSIRO or the Commonwealth or for specific purposes or for personal reasons, including family reasons and where taking other categories of leave is not appropriate or paid leave credits are not available. 67.2 The maximum period of leave without pay which may be granted at any one time is three years, although the period may be extended in some circumstances, at the discretion of CSIRO. 67.3 In the case of specified term staff, leave may not be granted beyond the end of the approved employment period. 68. SICK AND CARER S LEAVE 68.1 Sick Leave a An officer may use their available sick leave for the purposes of personal illness or injury or unforeseen personal emergencies. b On appointment, CSIRO officers except casual officers and former CSIRO officers with a break in service not exceeding 2 calendar months will receive a credit of 2 days 14.7 hours paid sick leave. c In addition to any credit granted in accordance with clause 68.1 b , CSIRO officers except casual officers accrue sick leave at the rate of 1.25 days 9.19 hours per   CSIRO Enterprise Agreement 2020 2023 43 month for standard hours of duty subject to a maximum of 15 days 110.25 hours per annum. Sick and carer s leave accrues progressively and is credited on the first day of the month following the accrual. With the exception of clause 68.1 b , sick and carer s leave for part time officers is accrued on a pro rata basis. d Paid sick leave is cumulative but will not be paid out to the officer on termination of employment. Paid sick leave counts as service for all purposes. e An officer who has received an annual credit of sick leave on 1 January or on appointment during the 12 months prior to the commencement date of this Agreement, will transition to a monthly accrual from 1 January 2018. f An officer will not be entitled to paid sick leave for any period during which they are entitled to, or are receiving workers compensation payments. g An officer in receipt of workers compensation for more than 45 weeks will accrue sick leave on the basis of hours actually worked. h Where paid sick leave credits are exhausted, sick leave without pay may be granted on provision of satisfactory medical evidence. In any continuous sick leave absence period, any periods of sick leave without pay in excess of an aggregate of 26 weeks will not count as service for any purpose except long service leave in accordance with the Long Service Leave Commonwealth Employees Act 1976. i An officer will not be entitled to paid sick leave or carer s leave while also entitled to paid maternity leave under the Maternity Leave Commonwealth Employment Act 1973, as amended, or whilst absent on paid parental leave. j Sick leave cannot be taken at half pay or converted to half pay. k Prior government service, as defined in the Long Service Leave Commonwealth Employees Act 1976 and Long Service Leave Commonwealth Employees Regulations 2016, is recognised for the purpose of establishing a sick leave credit on commencement with CSIRO, provided that any breaks in such service do not exceed two calendar months. 68.2 Carer s Leave a Officers are entitled to use their available sick leave for the purposes of providing care or support to a member of the officer s immediate family or household who requires care or support because of a personal illness or injury of the member or an unexpected emergency affecting the member. b An officer will not be entitled to paid carer s leave while on maternity or parental leave. 68.3 Unpaid carer s leave a An officer including a casual officer is entitled to two days of unpaid leave on each occasion that the officer is required to provide care or support to a member of the officer s immediate family or household. b Unpaid carer s leave is only available where an officer has exhausted their entitlement to paid carer s leave. There is no limit on the number of occasions for which the officer can take unpaid carer s leave. c Unpaid carer s leave will not count as service. 68.4 Medical evidence a Sick leave or carer s leave with pay shall be granted subject to available credits   CSIRO Enterprise Agreement 2020 2023 44 on production of satisfactory medical evidence or if not reasonably practicable, a statutory declaration without production of medical certificate, to the extent of five days for sick leave and five days for carer s leave in any calendar year. In both cases, no more than three consecutive days may be taken without a medical certificate. b Where practicable, an officer must give notice prior to the absence of the intention to take sick carer s leave or otherwise notify of such absence at the first opportunity on the day of absence. c Sick carer s leave will not be deducted in respect to a public holiday that the officer would otherwise have observed. d An officer who is medically unfit for duty or is required to provide care or support to a member of their family or household while on recreation leave, or long service leave and who applies for sick carer s leave, shall be granted leave subject to satisfactory medical evidence being provided as soon as reasonably practicable. Recreation leave or long service leave will be re credited to the extent of any sick carer s leave granted. 68.5 Effect of leave without pay Absences on leave without pay, which do not count for service, do not accrue sick leave. 68.6 National Employment Standards Sick and carer s leave must not be used for purposes other than what is provided by the National Employment Standards if it would be detrimental to an officer in any respect, when compared to the National Employment Standards under the Fair Work Act 2009. 69. RECREATION LEAVE 69.1 A full time officer is entitled to four 4 weeks 147 hours paid recreation leave per year. Recreation leave accrues progressively at the rate of 0.33 weeks 12.25 hours per month. Part time officers accrue recreation leave pro rata based on their standard hours of duty. 69.2 Recreation leave may not be taken in advance of accrual. 69.3 Recreation leave will not accrue for any period of leave which does not count for service. 69.4 The following categories of officers accrue additional recreation leave a shift workers regularly rostered for Sunday and holiday duty forming part of the ordinary hours of attendance per week shall be allowed seven consecutive days leave including non working days per year in addition to the period of recreation leave prescribed in clause 69.1 b caretakers in residence are entitled to an additional one day 7.35 hours of recreation leave for each public holiday for which they are required to remain on residence, subject to a maximum of five days 36.75 hours leave per year c officers in remote localities see clause 30 and d officers entitled to secure leave which is credited as recreation leave see clause 31 .   CSIRO Enterprise Agreement 2020 2023 45 69.5 Where employment ceases, the officer will be paid the value of any unused recreation leave. Payment will be at the rate that would have been paid had the officer taken the entitlement as a period of leave and includes the following allowances where applicable a ERA, if it was received for a continuous period of at least 12 months preceding the date of cessation b Payment for shift work, restriction duty or overtime where it was received regularly i.e. in 50 or more of the pays received in the 12 month period preceding cessation. In this case the average fortnightly payment during that period will be included and c First Aid Allowance, Superior Performance Rating Premium Step and ACDP Site Allowance. 69.6 Recreation leave is cumulative. 69.7 Leave to be taken a Recreation leave is available to ensure that regular breaks are taken from the workplace for rest and relaxation. b It is important for health and wellbeing that leave is taken within a reasonable period of its accrual and that planning for leave is incorporated into workload management. c To facilitate an officer taking leave CSIRO shall grant the application where an officer has a recreation leave credit equal to or exceeding a credit representing two calendar years of service and applies with at least one months notice for leave to reduce the excess credit by a period of up to one quarter of the total leave credit. d Where an officer has on either 1 January or 1 July a recreation leave credit of 45 days 330.75 hours or more or 50 days 367.5 hours or more in the case of shift workers, CSIRO will direct the officer to take a specified number of days period of recreation leave within a three month period. The period specified will be a period equivalent to 10 45 rounded to the nearest whole day of the recreation leave credit at the notice date. e If the officer fails to take the required period of leave days specified in the direction by 1 April where directed on 1 January or 1 October where directed on 1 July salary will not be paid for the recreation leave period, instead the officer will be provided with paid recreation leave during the period. Officers are not to attend work during periods of recreation leave. f An officer who is already on approved leave shall not be directed to take recreation leave until they have completed the period of approved leave. In these circumstances the officer must comply with the direction within a period of three months. 69.8 Cashing out leave a An officer may apply to cash out a period of recreation leave. To access this provision a balance of at least 20 days 147 hours or the equivalent number of days for part time officers must be retained an application to cash out leave must be made during the period 1st to 31st March of each year 5 days 36.75 hours only or the equivalent number of days for part time officers can be cashed out   CSIRO Enterprise Agreement 2020 2023 46 a block of recreation leave of at least 10 days 73.5 hours or equivalent number of days for part time officers duration must have been taken in the preceding 12 months prior to the date of application and each application requires agreement in writing between CSIRO and the officer. b The officer will be paid the full amount that would have been paid had the officer taken the entitlement as a period of leave. PART G. BALANCING WORK AND PERSONAL LIFE 70. PART TIME JOB SHARE ARRANGEMENTS 70.1 Definition A part time officer is a member of staff who works less than ordinary hours of duty 36 3 4 hours per week has specified hours of work and subject to legislative requirements, receives on a pro rata basis, equivalent pay and conditions to those of full time officers of equivalent classification. 70.2 Agreement in writing Prior to commencing part time work, CSIRO and the officer shall agree in writing on a regular pattern of work, specifying the hours to be worked each day, which days of the week the officer will work, the actual starting and finishing times each day, and whether the part time work is for a specified period. No pressure will be exerted on full time officers to convert to part time work or to transfer to another position to make way for part time work. 70.3 Variation Any part time work arrangement may be varied by agreement. Such variation shall be recorded in writing. 70.4 Rate for ordinary and additional hours worked A part time officer shall be paid for ordinary hours worked at the rate prescribed for the officer s classification. Additional hours may be worked in accordance with clause 23. 70.5 Consideration of officer initiated proposals a Officer initiated proposals for part time work will be considered promptly and with due consideration for the reasons put forward by the officer in support of the proposal. Such consideration will be subject to operational requirements. b However, if after maternity or parental leave an officer proposes to return to work on a part time basis, their proposal will be approved unless there are strong reasons for not doing so. Having an operational need for a full time person is not, of itself, an acceptable reason for denying an application for part time work. c Where management receives a part time or job share proposal in writing from an officer, such a request can only be refused on reasonable business grounds and the reasons for the refusal will be provided in writing to the officer concerned. 70.6 Reversion Where a full time officer has entered into a part time work arrangement, the following provisions will apply a Where the arrangement is for a specified period, the officer will revert to full time employment at the expiry of the specified period in the absence of an agreement for the arrangement to continue or be otherwise varied.   CSIRO Enterprise Agreement 2020 2023 47 b Where the arrangement is not for a specified period, and the officer wishes to revert to full time employment, the officer will notify CSIRO. CSIRO will revert the officer to full time status as soon as practicable. 71. RETURN FROM LENGTHY ABSENCES In order to support officers returning to CSIRO after absences of one year or more, the individual and their Line Manager will jointly develop an agreed return to work program designed to reintegrate the officer into the work environment. The content of the program will vary depending on factors such as The length of and reason for the absence The extent and nature of changes impacting on the workplace during the absence and Changes in the officer s field of expertise. 72. CHILDCARE CSIRO has established on site childcare facilities at several sites as a key strategy to attract and retain staff. In consultation with the parties to this Agreement, CSIRO will conduct a staff demographic analysis and staff survey each time there are significant additions to current facilities, and for new building projects, at all CSIRO workplaces and assess the feasibility of the provision of additional childcare facilities at CSIRO workplaces and raise awareness of CSIRO procedures and guidelines. 73. FACILITIES FOR NURSING PARENTS 73.1 CSIRO recognises that some officers may need to express breast milk during working hours. This requires A lockable area that is clean, hygienic and private Comfortable seating Access to facilities for washing hands and equipment and Adequate refrigeration space for storage of expressed milk. 73.2 It is expected that these requirements will be incorporated into existing facilities such as First Aid rooms and will be taken account of in new building design. 74. WORKING AWAY FROM BASE 74.1 CSIRO officers may work from home or off site on an intermittent basis or for one off short periods. These working patterns have developed over many years to suit CSIRO s research and management environment. The principles below are not meant to disrupt or supplant these current ad hoc arrangements but will apply where more formal or longer term arrangements are proposed. 74.2 Key Principles   CSIRO Enterprise Agreement 2020 2023 48 a Any such arrangement has to be agreed between CSIRO and the applicant before it can proceed. b Access to home based work is not an entitlement and requires approval by the Delegate. c Appropriate supervisory, HSE and security measures need to be in place to ensure both CSIRO s and the officer s needs are met. 75. FLEXIBLE WORKING HOURS FLEXTIME 75.1 Introduction These flextime arrangements apply only to those officers in CSOF Level 1 to CSOF Level 4 who are required to formally record attendance. Other officers may access informal flexible attendance arrangements with the agreement of their Line Manager. 75.2 Flexible Working Hours Flextime Scheme a Flextime is a commonly used term to describe the flexible attendance arrangements which apply in CSIRO. The flextime scheme enables officers to work efficiently while at the same time recognising that officers have to accommodate both work and private commitments on a daily basis. This is achieved by allowing time off to be granted where this is consistent with work demands. b Additional benefits include reduced administrative costs resulting from fewer formal leave applications for short absences and fewer pay variations for short absences c Flextime is a standard practice in CSIRO but is always subject to operational requirements. While some officers will have less scope to take advantage of the scheme, planning and good communication should allow flexible arrangements to apply in most situations. d Line Managers have the discretion to deny flexible attendance arrangements where this would compromise the maintenance of satisfactory work levels, communication or services. Line Managers must ensure that officers do not attend outside standard hours in workload troughs merely to build up flex credits. e Flextime does not apply to shift workers and casual officers. 75.3 Recording Attendance Officers at CSOF Level 5 and above are exempt from formally recording attendance. Officers below CSOF Level 5 must keep formal daily attendance records unless they are offered exemption from this requirement by the Delegate. They must formally accept or reject that offer. 75.4 Definitions for the purpose of this clause Standard hours Fixed period, within the bandwidth, of seven hours 21 minutes plus at least 30 minutes for lunch. Core time Fixed period of not more than four hours within the bandwidth during which attendance is mandatory unless leave or flex leave is approved. Core time can comprise one or two time blocks.   CSIRO Enterprise Agreement 2020 2023 49 Lunch period A period of not less than 30 minutes nor more than two hours which must commence no later than five hours after the start of the bandwidth. Flexible periods Time period outside core time but within the bandwidth during which individual officers have the scope to vary their attendance pattern, subject to work requirements. Flextime An approved absence which is deducted from Flex Credits may include core time and may create a flex debit provided that this debit is not more than 10 hours at the completion of the pay fortnight. 75.5 Hours of Duty Full time officers must average 73 hours and 30 minutes of duty each pay fortnight. Part time officers must average the hours of duty stipulated in their letter of appointment. Officers must be present during core time unless given approval to be absent and take a lunch break during the lunch period. 75.6 Credit Debit Accumulation, Carryover and Settlement a Flex credit is the time worked in excess of seven hours 21 minutes within the bandwidth. A maximum of 10 hours flex credit may be accumulated in each pay fortnight unless otherwise approved by the delegate following a recommendation by the line manager. A maximum of 60 hours flex credit may be accrued. b Flex debit is the time worked short of seven hours 21 minutes within the bandwidth. The maximum allowable flex debit at the completion of any pay fortnight is 10 hours. 75.7 Discharging Credit Accrual a If an officer applies to access their available flex credit and is refused, CSIRO will have three months to provide the opportunity for the credit to be taken. During this time the onus is on CSIRO to allow the leave to be taken. b If at the end of the three month period, management has not allowed the leave to be taken, and the flex credit has not been discharged, the officer shall, upon application, be paid at single time for the period of leave. Alternatively, they may elect to retain the flex credit. c CSIRO and the officer may elect by mutual agreement to have some or all of the accrued flex credit paid out at single time before the expiry of three months. 75.8 Discharging Debit Accrual a Debits in excess of 10 hours at the end of each pay fortnight must be covered by submission of a leave application. b If an officer has a debit accrual on ceasing employment an equivalent deduction will be made from any payments due in accordance with the requirements of the Fair Work Act 2009. 75.9 Overtime   CSIRO Enterprise Agreement 2020 2023 50 a A full time officer who formally records attendance and who is directed to work outside standard hours can elect either to be paid in accordance with clause 23 or accrue flex credit for the additional hours worked. Flex credit does not accrue for hours paid as overtime. b An officer working part time may be required to perform additional duty. Payment for additional hours shall be made in accordance with clause 23. 75.10 Travel Business related travel within the bandwidth is regarded as time on duty for the purposes of credit accrual. 75.11 Flextime in Conjunction with Other Leave Flex leave may be taken in conjunction with other forms of leave provided that the total authorised leave on any day does not exceed seven hours 21 minutes. 76. AVERAGING PAY OVER A REDUCED WORKING YEAR 76.1 In addition to flexible work provisions such as permanent part time work, leave without pay LWOP or study leave etc, this scheme adds flexibility in the taking of approved periods of LWOP. Where an officer and CSIRO agree, the officer may elect to work a reduced working year of between 40 and 48 weeks. Officers may access the scheme for study, travel or other personal reasons. For example, those officers with school age dependents may wish to combine these non work periods with conventional recreation leave so as to be at home during all or most of the school holiday periods. 76.2 Key Principles a Officers participating in this scheme will have their income averaged to take into account periods of LWOP of between four and 12 weeks in any 12 month period. b Arrangements approved under these Guidelines need to be initiated by officers and approved by CSIRO. Access to this form of LWOP is not an entitlement and requires approval by the Delegate. c The 12 month period is not restricted to either calendar or financial years and once the 12 month period starts an officer may elect to cancel or vary the arrangement only with the approval of CSIRO d Normally it is expected that this form of leave will be taken in blocks of five working days, but periods of less than five days, may be granted with the approval of the Delegate. This may be taken in conjunction with other forms of leave. 76.3 On resignation, transfer and or at the end of the 12 month period, a reconciliation shall be conducted of the leave taken and salary paid. 77. PHASED RETIREMENT OF MATURE AGED STAFF 77.1 CSIRO recognises the skills, expertise and knowledge held by more mature officers, and the contribution that they can make to the Organisation including as mentors and developers of other officers. CSIRO offers a range of flexible working arrangements to assist mature aged officers phasing to retirement. 77.2 Information on the flexible working arrangements in this Agreement and other policy options, including but not limited to post retirement and voluntary fellowships, will be made available to staff on the CSIRO intranet.   CSIRO Enterprise Agreement 2020 2023 51 77.3 Where an officer confirms in writing that they intend retiring within the next two years, CSIRO will work with that officer to develop an individual and specific program for phasing to retirement. Elements of this program may include changed mode of employment including reduced working hours access to accrued leave access to other flexible working arrangements a mentoring role a role in training and development of other officers time and resources to capture their knowledge in appropriate knowledge management systems reasonable time to bring existing work to be publication ready or equivalent , if applicable and other activities as agreed by both parties e.g. educational activities, science communication, contribution to internal and external fora . 77.4 Where an officer has indicated a firm date of retirement, management should not unreasonably refuse an application to access flexible working arrangements in the period of two years prior to their date of retirement. Where management receives a proposal in writing from an officer, any rejection by management must be justified in writing to the officer concerned. 77.5 Changes to working arrangements in preparation for retirement may impact on superannuation entitlements. Officers who are considering these changes are encouraged to seek financial advice, at their own expense. PART H. MOBILITY OF STAFF 78. PERMANENT RELOCATION 78.1 Inter City relocation from one city or regional area to another a Early and informal discussion will occur with officers and their representatives excluding union officials when relocation is being considered between cities and or regional locations. b Once compulsory relocation has been approved by CSIRO, the officers concerned will be given reasonable formal written notice of transfer. The notice period, as specified in the formal written notice of transfer, recognises that officers require adequate time to assess the impact of a transfer on their careers and on their families and to undertake measures of their own to minimise the disruption. Officers may waive, or agree to reduce, the notice period. c To enable CSIRO to develop relocation plans, officers should provide where possible, early informal advice of their intention to relocate after receiving formal notice. However, formal advice of their intentions must be provided not less than eight months prior to the proposed date of transfer, unless otherwise mutually agreed. d Officers who are compulsorily transferred from one city or regional area to another, may incur costs and inconvenience as a result of the relocation. In these circumstances standard CSIRO relocation provisions apply, including   CSIRO Enterprise Agreement 2020 2023 52 Familiarisation, pre transfer and post transfer visits Temporary accommodation and meal costs Reimbursement of transport and removal costs Incidental relocation expenses Access to miscellaneous leave Reimbursement of costs relating to the sale and purchase of houses Education Costs Fares and travelling expenses Other costs specific to any individual officers particular situation and Advances to cover other reimbursable expenses. e Where necessary, specific arrangements will be determined consultatively by the Business Unit, officers and their representatives for each relocation, taking into account the circumstances of the move and likely expenses to the impacted officers. This specific relocation package will apply to all officers impacted, for the duration of that relocation exercise and this will be detailed in the package. 78.2 Intra City relocation within a city a Early and informal discussion will occur with officers and their representatives excluding union officials when relocation is being considered within cities. b Once compulsory relocation has been approved by CSIRO the officers concerned will be given reasonable formal written notice of transfer. The notice period, as specified in the formal written notice of transfer, recognises that officers require adequate time to assess the impact of a transfer on their careers and on their families and to undertake measures of their own to minimise the disruption. Officers may waive, or agree to reduce, the notice period. c Officers who are compulsorily transferred from one location to another within the same city may incur costs and inconvenience as a result of the relocation. Where necessary, special arrangements will be determined consultatively by the Business Unit, officers and their representatives for each relocation, taking into account the circumstances of the move and likely expense to the impacted officers. Items of assistance may include but not be limited to Excess travelling time and fares Motor vehicle allowance and or Other costs specific to any individual officer s particular situation. d This level of assistance will apply to all eligible officers impacted for the duration specified in the special arrangements and will be detailed in the information provided. 79. ACCOMMODATION CHANGES CSIRO will provide officers with accommodation suitable for their work role and function.   CSIRO Enterprise Agreement 2020 2023 53 PART I. DISPUTE PROCEDURES 80. REVIEW OF DECISIONS TO TERMINATE EMPLOYMENT 80.1 An officer will have the right to bring an action under the Fair Work Act 2009 in respect of termination of employment. This will be the sole right of review in respect of such actions. 80.2 In particular, termination of, or a decision to terminate employment, cannot be reviewed under dispute avoidance and settlement procedures addressed in clause 81 of this Agreement. 80.3 Nothing in this Agreement prevents CSIRO from terminating an officer without notice for serious misconduct in accordance with the Fair Work Act 2009. 81. RESOLUTION OF DISPUTES 81.1 If a dispute relates to a a matter arising under the Agreement or b the National Employment Standards this term sets out procedures to settle the dispute. 81.2 An officer who is a party to the dispute may appoint a representative for the purposes of the procedures in this term. 81.3 In the first instance, the parties to the dispute must try to resolve the dispute at the workplace level, by discussions between the officer or officers and relevant supervisors and or management. 81.4 If discussions at the workplace level do not resolve the dispute, a party to the dispute may refer the matter to the Fair Work Commission. 81.5 The Fair Work Commission may deal with the dispute in two stages a The Fair Work Commission will first attempt to resolve the dispute as it considers appropriate, including by mediation, conciliation, expressing an opinion or making a recommendation and b if the Fair Work Commission is unable to resolve the dispute at the first stage, the Fair Work Commission may then i arbitrate the dispute and ii make a determination that is binding on the parties. Note If the Fair Work Commission arbitrates the dispute, it may also use the powers that are available to it under the Act. A decision that the Fair Work Commission makes when arbitrating a dispute is a decision for the purpose of Div 3 of Part 5.1 of the Act. Therefore, an appeal may be made against the decision. 81.6 While the parties are trying to resolve the dispute using the procedures in this term a an officer must continue to perform their work as they would normally unless they have a reasonable concern about an imminent risk to their health or safety and   CSIRO Enterprise Agreement 2020 2023 54 b an officer must comply with a direction given by CSIRO to perform other available work at the same workplace, or at another workplace, unless i the work is not safe or ii applicable occupational health and safety legislation would not permit the work to be performed or iii the work is not appropriate for the officer to perform or iv there are other reasonable grounds for the officer to refuse to comply with the direction. 81.7 The parties to the dispute agree to be bound by a decision made by the Fair Work Commission in accordance with this term. 82. WORKPLACE ISSUES RESOLUTION PROCEDURE 82.1 CSIRO expects that most Workplace Issues will be resolved in normal day to day interactions at the local workplace level, however situations may arise where informal resolution fails or is not appropriate. The Workplace Issues Resolution Procedure provides a framework for the fair, equitable, transparent and timely resolution of issues resulting from the effect of decisions, actions or conduct connected to employment in CSIRO. 82.2 The procedure consists of the following process steps Step 1 Workplace Issue notified reported to a Manager. Step 2 Workplace Issue evaluated and categorised as a Conduct Issue or Non conduct Issue. Step 3 Workplace Issue dealt with either informally and or formally as appropriate to the type of Workplace Issue including a potential investigation. Step 4 Communication of the outcome advised to the relevant persons and if required, action taken. Step 5 Review of the outcome, if sought and applicable, undertaken by the Chief Executive Review Panel and the subsequent decision of the Chief Executive being final and the matter closed.   CSIRO Enterprise Agreement 2020 2023 55 PART J. SCHEDULES TO AGREEMENT SCHEDULE 1 MANAGEMENT OF UNDERPERFORMANCE Where underperformance of an officer is identified, the officer will be given the opportunity to improve their performance with the desired outcome being that the officer achieves the specified standard of performance within a designated time frame. a The Management of Underperformance procedure is intended to be applied when communication, counselling and training where a deficit in the necessary skills or experience has been identified have failed to bring about an acceptable standard of performance. b The procedure is distinct from and shall not be used where misconduct Workplace Issues Resolution Procedure Conduct Issue or invalidity procedures are more appropriate. c The procedure can be commenced at any time during the Annual Performance Agreement cycle. There is no requirement to wait for the completion of one or more Annual Performance Agreement cycles. d Any notes or records of counselling and training formal, informal or on the job which are placed on the officer s file, must be sighted by the officer and the officer must be given the opportunity to record comments. e Human Resource staff provide an important advisory and support role for supervisor Line Managers during this procedure. Officers may also seek procedural advice from Human Resource Managers at any time during the Management of Underperformance procedure. Officers may also enlist the assistance of a colleague officer or representative excluding union officials at any point in the procedure. f Prior to commencing the Management of Underperformance procedure, the supervisor Line Manager will inform the next level Manager of the proposed action. The next level Manager will satisfy themselves that the expectations of work level load of the officer concerned are reasonable and that the problem is not primarily one of personality based conflict requiring consideration of other remedies e.g. mediation, counselling etc . g The Management of Underperformance procedure consists of the following steps Step 1 Written notification of the commencement of the procedure and establishment of the assessment period which will default to a three month assessment period if the Line Manager and officer do not agree on a time frame. The notification to the officer will also include i the expected standard of performance ii the ways in which the officer is not meeting the expected standard of performance and guidance to assist the officer to achieve the expected standard of performance and iii a warning that failure to meet the expected standard of performance by the conclusion of the assessment period may lead to termination.   CSIRO Enterprise Agreement 2020 2023 56 Step 2 Appointment of the independent assessor to conduct the assessment of the officer s performance. Where the Senior Manager considers that fairness and objectivity of the assessor cannot be assured, the Senior Manager may appoint an alternative independent assessor. Step 3 Preparation of a report by the independent assessor and consideration of the report by the Senior Manager. The officer will be provided with a copy of the report of the independent assessor and invited to comment in writing to the Senior Manager. If the Senior Manager considers that the officer has achieved the specified standard of performance, the procedure will be concluded. Step 4 If the officer has not achieved the specified standard of performance, the Senior Manager will make a decision on a proposed action s which will be provided in writing to the officer and the officer given the opportunity to respond. Step 5 If the Senior Manager decides to terminate the officer s employment, the officer will have the right to bring an action against their termination of employment under clause 80 of this Agreement. The notice period to be provided will be in accordance with the Fair Work Act 2009. CSIRO may elect that the officer does not work through the notice period but will pay the officer the balance of the notice period in lieu. Step 6 Where the decision of the Senior Manager is to implement an action other than termination of employment, the officer has the right to request an independent review of the decision by the Chief Executive if the officer believes that the proposed action is unreasonable or there was a procedural flaw in the application of the Management of Underperformance procedure. Where a review is to be undertaken, the proposed action of the Senior Manager will be suspended pending the outcome of the review by the Chief Executive.   CSIRO Enterprise Agreement 2020 2023 57 SCHEDULE 2 SPECIFIED TERM EMPLOYMENT This Schedule applies to officers appointed on a specified term. 1. Criteria for term appointment a The parties agree that CSIRO will benefit from the stability afforded by effective and long term planning of skill needs. To this end, the parties accept that indefinite appointment is the standard form of employment for CSIRO officers, whilst it is acknowledged that specified term employment may be used in appropriate circumstances. Specified term employment means employment for a specified period of time and includes an appointment covering work that is clearly of a limited term nature. 2. Restrictions on Term Employment a The duration of a term appointment will vary depending on the circumstances in each case, however, subject to paragraph 3 of this Schedule, no single period of term appointment shall exceed five years. b Government sponsored employment and training schemes may require negotiation of variations to Awards and or Agreements to facilitate appointment as a designated trainee . 3. CSIRO Early Research Career CERC Postdoctoral Fellows special conditions CSIRO assists in the development of the next generation of leaders of the innovation system and CERC Postdoctoral Fellowships are the primary mechanism by which CSIRO delivers this assistance. CSIRO s purpose in offering CERC Postdoctoral Fellowships is to provide A differentiated career development program to deliver capability excellence and breadth across all facets of the national innovation system Research training via strategic research and development projects with a clear focus that will deliver real impact through science and technology excellence An innovative culture supporting the development and demonstration of original thinking and expertise leading to peer recognition and Opportunities to develop skills and experience in collaborative research teams to effectively work within national and global multi transdisciplinary and multi stakeholder environments. A CERC Postdoctoral Fellowship is intended, first and foremost, to enhance the person s research capability so that they are better able to pursue a career in science either within CSIRO or beyond. The following special conditions apply to appointments of CERC Postdoctoral Fellows a The duration of a CERC Postdoctoral Fellowship is three years full time or equivalent but may be a minimum of two years in special circumstances, allowing for breaks or part time pro rata considerations. Consecutive appointment as a CERC Postdoctoral Fellow may be offered only where the Fellowship is within a different discipline area to their first CERC Postdoctoral Fellowship. The consecutive appointment must provide a different learning, development and training opportunity than the first Fellowship. On completion of the Fellowship s, the officer s total relevant work experience since confirmation of their doctorate must not exceed six full time equivalent years.   CSIRO Enterprise Agreement 2020 2023 58 b i A structured learning development and training plan must be developed by the supervisor in consultation with the CERC Postdoctoral Fellow within three months after commencement. The plan will be designed to facilitate the development of the Fellow s capabilities to those expected of an independent researcher and opportunity will be provided for the Fellow to apply those capabilities in their work, as they develop. ii The learning development and training plan will include defined opportunities for formal involvement in research planning, conference attendance, publication and review of scientific papers and fully funded training courses for skills development, unless otherwise agreed between CSIRO and the Fellow. c Except as provided in clause 18.4, a person appointed as a CERC Postdoctoral Fellow is classified at a minimum of CSOF Level 4.2. Higher pay points within CSOF 4 may be used where the CERC Postdoctoral Fellow has had prior relevant postdoctoral research experience. d CERC Postdoctoral Fellows have access to rewards including performance and development steps, performance cash rewards and accelerated advancement during their Fellowship and promotion. 4. Records CSIRO will maintain a record of all term appointments and reappointments. This information will be provided to the appointee on request. 5. Equitable Treatment of Staff a The parties recognise that patterns of employment in CSIRO have changed significantly in recent years. Consistent with the commitment to treat all officers equitably, whether term or indefinite, it is agreed that officers employed for a specified term will be informed of their rights and options in respect to applicable superannuation schemes on commencement or when their employment situation changes required to participate in the APA process, when employed for periods exceeding three months eligible for performance rewards on the same basis as an indefinite officer including entitlement to Performance and Development Step progression where breaks between appointments do not exceed three months in an APA cycle exempt from a further probation period provided that i the break since their last period of service is not greater than six months ii prior service has been satisfactory iii the appointee is medically fit to perform the requirements of the position and iv the new duties are comparable with the duties undertaken in the previous position. eligible for applicable relocation conditions temporary or permanent relocation as appropriate provided that i their position is required at the new location   CSIRO Enterprise Agreement 2020 2023 59 ii they are employed at the date of written notice of transfer to a new location and iii their term extends beyond the transfer date. 6. Separation Payment a In order to encourage term officers to remain until the end of their term, and in recognition that they may forgo other employment opportunities in doing so, such officers will be entitled to the following On separation from CSIRO following completion of a period of fixed term employment, term officers who are not offered further employment, will receive a payment for completed months of service equivalent to one week s salary for each six months of service. Service will include contiguous periods of fixed term employment preceding the concluding term. An officer shall not have an entitlement to the separation payment if they decline an offer by CSIRO of further employment in the same city at the same or higher classification and salary level and the period of employment offered is of at least six months duration and the offer is made at least one month prior to the term end. For the purposes of this paragraph service shall date from 17 June 1998 the minimum specified term period for payment is one calendar month e.g. from 9 April to 8 May payment is calculated at the termination salary and includes the following allowances i Enhanced Responsibilities Allowance, if it was received for a continuous period of at least 12 months preceding the date of cessation ii Payment for shift work, restriction duty or overtime where it was received regularly i.e. in 50 or more of the pays received in the 12 month period preceding cessation. In this case the average fortnightly payment during that period will be included for the purpose of calculating the separation payment and iii First Aid Allowance, Superior Performance Rating Premium Step and ACDP Site Allowance. where there is a change in hours of work during the period of the term for example, a movement to part time hours , payment will be based on average hours worked over the full period of the term an officer shall not receive payment more than once for a specific period of service all periods of leave without pay do not count as service for purposes of payment under this clause and   CSIRO Enterprise Agreement 2020 2023 60 an officer who secures indefinite CSIRO employment during or at the conclusion of a period of fixed term employment, shall have no entitlement to this separation payment in respect of previous periods of term employment. b An officer who resigns prior to the term end date is entitled to the separation payment only in the following circumstances The officer does not receive an offer of further CSIRO employment as described in a The officer provides the required two weeks notice of resignation and The date of effect of the resignation is within two weeks of the term end date. 7. Early termination by CSIRO Where CSIRO terminates employment except if the termination is due to inefficiency or misconduct prior to the completion of the specified term period, the officer shall be given two weeks notice of the early termination, subject to the minimum notice period required under the Fair Work Act 2009 be given access to redeployment by being placed on CSIRO s central redeployment register as a specified term officer and being considered for opportunities that arise for which they have suitable skills and be entitled to a separation payment as per paragraph 6 of this Schedule for completed months of service and the period of service that would have otherwise been completed if the employment continued to the end of the specified term period. 8. Eligibility for Indefinite Appointment a Except as provided in b of this clause, or paragraph 9 of this Schedule, term officers may be considered for indefinite appointment in the following circumstances i They are candidates for externally advertised positions or ii They were originally recruited through a competitive selection process and are candidates for internally advertised positions or in the opinion of the Organisation it is desirable to offer indefinite employment without a position being advertised such offers are at the discretion of the Delegate . b Trainees, who were recruited through external advertisement, are eligible to apply for internally advertised positions after the first six months of their term. 9. Review of Tenure Status For the purposes of this clause, periods of service will be aggregated provided no break between those periods exceeds six months. a i Where a term officer is being considered for a subsequent term appointment which will extend total employment beyond four years, an assessment overseen by the Delegate will be completed in the last three months of their current term, to determine whether further employment is appropriate and whether such employment will be offered on a term or indefinite basis.   CSIRO Enterprise Agreement 2020 2023 61 ii The officer shall be notified in writing of the result of the assessment and the reasons for the decisions at least one month prior to the term end. However, the decision is not subject to review under clause 81 of this Agreement, or any other CSIRO review mechanisms. b i Where a term officer has had more than seven years of service, and further employment is being considered, an assessment process shall be completed, in the last three months of their current term to determine whether further employment is appropriate and whether such employment will be offered on a term or indefinite basis. ii The officer shall be notified in writing at least one month prior to the term end of the result of the assessment and the reasons for the decisions shall be provided in writing if requested. If the officer is not satisfied with the reasons for the decision the officer may seek a review under clause 81 of this Agreement. iii For the purposes of this assessment, where an officer would be offered indefinite appointment but does not satisfy the requirements of paragraph 8 a i.e. was not originally recruited through a competitive selection process and is not a candidate for an externally advertised position , those requirements may be waived if the Business Unit considers that there would be no advantage in conducting a competitive selection process. 10. Term Officer Redeployment other than Early termination by CSIRO a In addition to any Business Unit s processes, an officer shall have access to CSIRO s redeployment process by being placed on CSIRO s central redeployment register as a specified term officer and being considered for opportunities that arise for which they have suitable skills provided that they were appointed following a competitive recruitment process and have at least four years aggregate employment, provided that no breaks between periods of service exceeds six months. b Consideration of any outplacement benefit will be at CSIRO s discretion.   CSIRO Enterprise Agreement 2020 2023 62 SCHEDULE 3 REDEPLOYMENT AND RETRENCHMENT 1. Application a These provisions do not apply to i an officer appointed on probation whose appointment has not been confirmed or ii an officer appointed for a specified period including casual appointment. Officers on a specified term employment have access to redeployment and other provisions in accordance with Schedule 2. 2. Potentially Redundant Officers a An officer is potentially redundant if i the officer is included in a group of officers, which group comprises a greater number of officers than is necessary for the efficient and economic working of CSIRO ii the services of the officer cannot be effectively used because of technological, structural or other changes in the work methods of CSIRO or changes in the nature, extent or organisation of the functions of CSIRO or iii the duties usually performed by the officer are to be performed in a different city and the officer is not willing to perform duties at that city. 3. Consultation a Where, due to organisational change or restructuring, ten or more officers are likely to become potentially redundant, the following information shall be made available and discussed with those officers and subsequently provided, in writing, to the relevant unions details of the circumstances causing the potential redundancy situation the impact of the proposed change upon science, research capabilities and or support for these areas the anticipated number of officers affected and their level, functional area and location and the method of identifying potentially redundant officers. Where the provision of this information will allow an individual officer to be identified, all but the identifying information will be made available. b Consultation in accordance with clause 53 will then occur so that options and measures to reduce the need for, and mitigate the impacts of, redundancies can be fully explored. c Officers will be notified that they can request the involvement and assistance of a representative. Where requested, the representative can participate in discussions concerning that officer.   CSIRO Enterprise Agreement 2020 2023 63 4. Voluntary Redundancy Substitution a An officer who is potentially redundant may exchange positions with another officer who would not contest redundancy. This is referred to as Voluntary Redundancy Substitution. Voluntary Redundancy Substitution is entirely at CSIRO s discretion and will only be approved where CSIRO determines that the skills of both individuals are a close match and that there will be no adverse impact on ongoing work requirements. Discussions will occur with each individual officer before final approval by CSIRO. b Substitution will only proceed where no suitable redeployment opportunities are identified. c Where substitution is approved the Senior Manager will provide the officer with the following information and formal advice. Where paragraph 3 a applies, unless a shorter period is agreed between CSIRO and the officer, the formal advice will be provided no earlier than four weeks from the date on which the information at sub paragraph 3 a has been provided to the officer a written estimate of the financial termination benefits which apply for each of the redundancy options including income maintenance formal advice in writing detailing that I. the officer can agree to a termination date that is within 10 working days of receipt of this formal advice II. the officer will be paid the equivalent of 8 weeks pay in lieu of notice in addition to the lump sum or income maintenance benefit, where applicable and III. the officer must provide written advice as to their preferred benefit as soon as practicable, prior to the termination date. d Where an officer has requested the involvement of a representative, the representative will be provided with the information in respect of the officer concerned. e Where substitution is approved, clauses 5 to 8 and 11 of this Schedule do not apply to the officer. f CSIRO will, on an annual basis, make all officers aware of the option of being listed on a Voluntary Redundancy Substitution register which will be maintained by CSIRO Human Resources. CSIRO will not refuse an officer s election to be placed on the register. Additionally, when Business Units are undertaking organisational change or restructuring, they will advise all officers at that time of the opportunity for voluntary redundancy substitution. 5. Identification of individual officers from an impacted group of officers a After voluntary redundancy substitution has been considered, in any situation where the number of roles available is fewer than the current number of officers occupying those roles, the following process will be adopted. b The responsible Line Manager will use available knowledge and information to undertake an assessment of each officer against the organisational requirements for the role s developed in line with the applicable work classification standards. The principles of procedural fairness will be applied. The officer will have the opportunity   CSIRO Enterprise Agreement 2020 2023 64 to provide information if they so choose, however they will not be required to make a formal application for their existing role. c The final decision will be made by the responsible Line Manager and affected officers will be advised. Where it is determined that there is no ongoing organisational requirement for the officer s skills, the officer will be advised that they are potentially redundant and will be provided with information in accordance with sub paragraph 6 a . 6. Advice and information to individual impacted officer a Where an individual officer is likely to become redundant the Senior Manager will, at the earliest practicable time, advise the officer of the situation and at the same time will provide the officer with the following information details of the circumstances which have given rise to the potential redundancy why the individual officer s position has been identified as potentially redundant potential redeployment, including retraining prospects, within the Business Unit and more broadly, within CSIRO other options available which may prevent the redundancy a written estimate of the financial termination benefits which apply for each of the redundancy options including income maintenance in the event that redundancy is confirmed and comprehensive information concerning redeployment and redundancy procedures and the assistance that CSIRO Human Resources will provide. b Where an officer has requested the involvement of a representative, they will be provided with the information in respect of the officer concerned. 7. Redeployment a CSIRO will carry out an organisation wide survey, of existing and foreseeable vacancies which are at, or one level below, the officer s substantive CSOF level and in the same functional area. The minimum period over which this survey will be conducted will be 2 months or a shorter period may be agreed between CSIRO and the officer. b A position will be considered to be a suitable opportunity if that officer meets all the essential selection criteria for the position either immediately, or could reasonably be expected to do so after a reasonable period of retraining up to six months in the case of vacancies with indefinite tenure . c Where an officer accepts redeployment within CSIRO to a position of lower classification than their substantive classification level, payment will be at the rate necessary to bring their salary up to the salary received immediately before the date of redeployment for the following period i in the case of officers who have twenty or more years of service 14 months or ii in the case of other officers eight months. The income maintenance period shall commence on the day of transfer to a position of lower classification.   CSIRO Enterprise Agreement 2020 2023 65 d Where an officer secures further employment in CSIRO and is required to move house in order to take up the appointment, the officer will be eligible for the same conditions as would apply had the officer been promoted to that position. e For the purposes of calculating salary, allowances referenced in 9.2 e will apply. 8. Retrenchment a Formal written notification Where there are no apparent redeployment opportunities and the redundancy is to proceed, the officer will be formally advised in writing. This notification will detail the various options in terms of the timing of termination and the relevant benefits the officer may elect to receive on retrenchment. This notification shall provide formal notice of five weeks which will commence four weeks from the date of the formal written notification. b Cessation within 10 working days of receiving formal written notification If an officer does not contest redundancy and agrees to a termination date that is within 10 working days of receipt of their formal written notification the officer shall be paid the equivalent of 8 weeks pay in lieu of notice in addition to the lump sum or income maintenance benefit, where applicable . During this 10 day period the officer must provide written advice as to their preferred benefit. c Cessation after 10 working days of receiving formal written notification i Officers who choose to remain with CSIRO beyond the 10 working days following the receipt of their formal written notification, will receive, in addition to the lump sum or income maintenance benefit where applicable the remainder of the formal notice period referred to in sub paragraph 8 a . ii Employment will terminate at the completion of the period of notice. Where, prior to the completion of the notice period, the officer seeks appointment to an advertised vacancy but has not been assessed by the end of the notice period, employment will be extended until the officer s suitability for that position has been determined. d Financial planning, skilling and career support When requested by an officer, CSIRO will fund up to two visits to a CSIRO nominated outplacement service to obtain job seeking skills, career assessment and planning and CV preparation. In lieu of this, the officer may request an equivalent amount to undertake relevant training. In addition, CSIRO will fund one visit to a mutually agreed financial adviser. 9. Options for Redundancy Benefit An officer made redundant in accordance with this Schedule will receive a lump sum payment unless the officer elects to receive income maintenance.   CSIRO Enterprise Agreement 2020 2023 66 9.1 Lump Sum Payment a An eligible officer who is retrenched will receive a lump sum payment calculated in accordance with this paragraph. b Subject to a minimum payment of 4 weeks pay and a maximum of 48 weeks pay, the Lump Sum payable to a retrenched officer will be 2 weeks salary for each completed year of continuous service PLUS a pro rata payment for any additional completed months of continuous service, subject to any minimum amount the officer is entitled to under the Fair Work Act 2009. c Calculation of Lump Sum Where an officer has less than 24 years full time service, the redundancy payment will be calculated on a pro rata basis for any period where an officer has worked part time hours during their period of service. d For the purposes of calculating salary at the date of termination, the following payments will be included i Enhanced Responsibilities Allowance, if it was received for a continuous period of at least 12 months prior to formal advice being given under sub paragraph 8 a ii Payment for shift work, restriction duty or overtime where it was received regularly i.e. in 50 or more of the pays received in the 12 month period preceding the giving of notice under sub paragraph 8 a . The amount included will be the average fortnightly payment during the 12 month period and iii First Aid Allowance, Superior Performance Rating Premium Step and ACDP Site Allowance. 9.2. Income Maintenance after termination a Where an officer has elected to receive income maintenance the officer will be entitled to receive payments for the following period i in the case of officers who have twenty or more years of service 14 months or ii in the case of other officers eight months. b The income maintenance period shall commence on the day after termination. c During periods of income maintenance former officers will be eligible to apply and compete on merit for internally advertised vacancies. d The amounts to be paid by way of income maintenance shall be calculated as follows i where the former officer is unemployed, payment will be at a rate equivalent to their salary at the date of termination less any amount received by way of unemployment relief.   CSIRO Enterprise Agreement 2020 2023 67 ii where the former officer obtains employment outside CSIRO, payment if any will be at the rate necessary to bring their salary from that employment to the salary level at the date of termination. e For the purposes of calculating salary at the date of termination, the following payments will be included i Enhanced Responsibilities Allowance, if it was received for a continuous period of at least 12 months prior to formal advice being given under sub paragraph 8 a ii Superior Performance Rating Premium Step , but only for that part of the period of income maintenance that would have been paid, had the officer not been in receipt of income maintenance under the terms in this Schedule iii Payment for shift work, restriction duty or overtime where it was received regularly i.e. in 50 or more of the pays received in the 12 month period preceding the giving of notice under sub paragraph 8 a . The amount included will be the average fortnightly payment during the 12 month period and iv First Aid and ACDP site allowance. f During the period of income maintenance, former officers will be required to provide acceptable evidence of income from employment or unemployment relief in order to establish and maintain eligibility for income maintenance. 10. Service for Redundancy Pay Purposes For the purpose of calculating an entitlement in accordance with clause 9 of this Schedule, service means service in CSIRO Government service as defined in section 10 of the Long Service Leave Commonwealth Employees Act 1976 service with the Commonwealth other than service with a joint Commonwealth State body or a body corporate in which the Commonwealth does not have a controlling interest which is recognised for long service leave purposes service with the Australian Defence Forces service in another organisation where i an officer was transferred from that organisation with a transfer of function or ii an officer engaged by that organisation on work within a function is appointed as a result of the transfer of that function to the CSIRO and such service is recognised for long service leave purposes. Service not to count as service for redundancy pay purposes Any period of service which ceased in any of the following ways will not count as service for redundancy pay purposes retrenchment retirement on grounds of invalidity inefficiency or loss of qualifications forfeiture of office dismissal termination of probation appointment for reasons of unsatisfactory service or voluntary retirement at or above the minimum retiring age applicable to the officer or with the payment of an employer financed retirement benefit.   CSIRO Enterprise Agreement 2020 2023 68 Earlier periods of service For earlier periods of service to count there must be no break between the periods except where a the break in service is less than one month and occurs where an offer of employment with CSIRO was made and accepted by the officer before ceasing employment with the preceding employer or b the earlier period of service was with CSIRO and ceased because the officer was deemed by CSIRO to have resigned on marriage. Absences during a period of service Absences from duty which do not count as service for long service leave purposes will not count as service for redundancy pay purposes. 11. Review a An officer may seek a review under the Workplace Issues Resolution Procedure in relation to other redundancy issues which do not impinge on the validity of the decision to retrench them i.e. the purpose of the review cannot be to question the redundancy itself . b An officer may bring an action against termination of employment under clause 80 of this Agreement.   CSIRO Enterprise Agreement 2020 2023 69 SCHEDULE 4 DUTY AT SEA Duty at sea applies to all officers while confined on board a vessel at sea for periods in excess of 24 hours. 1. Definitions a Annual salary means the corresponding rate of pay listed in Schedule 6 of this Agreement. b A vessel is defined to be at sea from the time it leaves a wharf or anchorage at the start of a voyage until it returns to a wharf or anchorage at the completion of that voyage. c Normal fortnightly salary means the officer s Annual Salary converted to a fortnightly rate of pay, as specified by the formula in clause 18.3. Normal fortnightly salary includes any allowances due and payable to the officer and deemed to be salary by this Agreement. Daily payments made pursuant to clause 2 of this Schedule or any form of overtime payment are not to be included as part of the officer s normal fortnightly salary . 2. Duty at Sea allowance a Duty at Sea Allowance is payable in addition to an officer s normal fortnightly salary for all periods of more than 24 hours and pro rata thereafter spent on a vessel at sea. This payment is made in recognition of an officer s confinement aboard the vessel and the additional hours of work which may be required of an officer. b The daily payment for Duty at Sea shall be calculated in accordance with the following formula CSOF4.M Annual Salary X 121 X 1.2 313 3. Confinement Leave a In addition to other entitlements an officer shall receive one days leave for every Sunday or part thereof and or public holiday or part thereof the officer is confined on a vessel at sea. b i Subject to subclause 3 b ii, Confinement Leave credits will be available for use by the officer for a period of six months commencing on the date of conclusion of the voyage the settlement period . At the end of the settlement period, any Confinement Leave credits that have not been applied for will be paid to the officer in accordance with the following formula CSOF.4M Annual Salary X 100 X 1.2 313 ii An officer may use Confinement Leave credits by written application to CSIRO for a period of Confinement Leave. CSIRO shall not unreasonably withhold approval. Confinement Leave can only be taken in whole days. A grant of time off work shall be debited against the officer s Confinement Leave credit. Recreation Leave shall only be granted to an officer after their Confinement Leave credit balance is less than one day unless a written application for a period of Confinement Leave has been denied.   CSIRO Enterprise Agreement 2020 2023 70 4. Principles for Duty at Sea The parties agree that the following principles and practices shall apply to all CSIRO activities involving Duty at Sea, and represent minimum standards. a General i The parties to this Agreement shall agree upon a set of guidelines for Chief Scientists, Voyage Managers, participants, and observers in relation to research activity in the marine environment. All officers undertaking a voyage shall be provided with ready access to copies of the agreed guidelines. Copies shall be available on all CSIRO vessels. The guidelines shall be revised by the parties as necessary. ii Officers requested to participate in a voyage with less than five working days notice shall be entitled to decline participation. However, agreement for an officer to participate in a voyage at short notice shall not be unreasonably withheld. iii In the case of a change in the scheduled date of return of an officer to their normal residence, or in cases of un anticipated domestic need, and with the agreement of the Voyage Manager, a telephone call shall be provided at CSIRO expense, by the most appropriate means available. iv No officer will be required to work at sea for more than 85 days in any financial year except with the written consent of the officer concerned. v While at sea, an officer may be required to work on any day inclusive of Saturday, Sunday and Public holidays. vi The Master of the vessel has the authority for conduct, discipline and safety of all persons on board. In the first instance, however, CSIRO personnel will be responsible to the Voyage Manager for their duties and conduct. b Health and Safety i The parties to this Agreement are committed to and acknowledge their respective responsibilities ensuring that all work performed at sea is performed in an environment that is as safe as reasonably practicable, by developing and applying safe systems of work. ii All work at sea shall be conducted in accordance with the Work Health and Safety Act 2011 and other applicable Commonwealth legislation and Codes of Practice. In the absence of appropriate Commonwealth Codes of Practice, CSIRO shall conform with applicable standards of the States and Territories or recognized and accepted industry practice. c Maximum Periods of Duty No officer shall i be required to work in a single continuous session for more than 5 hours without a minimum break from duty of 30 minutes ii perform in excess of 30 hours total duty in any continuous 48 hour period ii be directed to work more than 16 hours in any continuous 24 hour period or iv be directed to work for more than 12 hours continuously in any watch inclusive of breaks.   CSIRO Enterprise Agreement 2020 2023 71 SCHEDULE 5 CLASSIFICATION LEVEL DESCRIPTORS The following classification level descriptors apply in relation to the CSIRO salary structure Level 1 Under regular supervision, performs duties requiring limited skills, initiative or responsibility. Level 2 Under general supervision, applies basic knowledge and or skills to straightforward routines and procedures using readily available guidelines and advice. Level 3 Under technical direction, applies knowledge and skills to a range of procedures and or techniques. May be required to solve problems of limited complexity, determine priorities within assigned tasks, vary standardised procedures or techniques and adapt to changes in work procedures or technologies. Applies communication skills relevant to the work area. Level 4 Under general direction, applies knowledge and skills to a specific task s involving the application or adaptation of a variety of procedures and techniques requiring specialised knowledge. Identifies and solves more complex problems, initiates and or follows complex instructions or procedures. Accountability for resources and the capacity to respond to and assist in implementing change are commonly features of this level. Applies well developed communication skills relevant to the work area. Level 5 Under limited direction, applies well developed knowledge and skills to one or more specific projects or services, requiring the development and adaptation of a wider variety of specialised procedures and techniques. Requires the ability to develop, test and evaluate complex options and issues. Planning, highly developed communication skills, capacity to initiate appropriate change and accountability for resources are commonly features of this level. OR Under limited direction about research project objectives and general approach, undertakes scientific or engineering research requiring originality, creativity and innovation and the application of scientific or engineering knowledge, expertise and skills in a limited area. Demonstrates basic ability in research planning and execution and the capacity to think in terms of fundamentals and create hypotheses. Level 6 Within broad guidelines, manages one or more highly significant projects or services, or undertakes work that has impact on the development of scientific or technological knowledge, on industry or on the community. This requires the application of high levels of disciplinary expertise or managerial knowledge. Demonstrates broad insight and significant skills in areas of expertise. Ability to deal with concepts requiring well developed deductive, evaluative and investigative skills that lead to outstanding work. Leadership, planning and negotiation skills, accountability for resources, initiation and management of change and well developed representation skills are commonly features of this level. OR   CSIRO Enterprise Agreement 2020 2023 72 Within broad guidelines on research project objectives, undertakes scientific or engineering research requiring a considerable degree of originality, creativity and innovation and the application of expert scientific or engineering knowledge. Has demonstrated ability in research planning and execution, and the judgement and tenacity required to reach research goals. May provide leadership to staff within the project, and may be responsible for the management of human, financial and material resources. QUALIFYING STATEMENT In levels 3, 4, 5 and 6 of the above classification level descriptors, knowledge and skills refers to the appropriate level of professional, technical, administrative or managerial knowledge and skills as specified in the CSIRO s Work Classification Standards. Level 7 Under broad guidance about objectives, manages a very significant administrative program. This requires a high degree of resource management and leadership ability. Has extensive expert knowledge, and considerable ability in planning and executing projects and implementing results. Typically provides expert administrative leadership to colleagues, with significant conceptual and creative input. Plans at the subprogram level, comprising a range of related projects, to meet objectives. Typically seeks, allocates and monitors significant resources. Has a significant role in negotiating complex, sensitive or contentious issues. OR Under broad guidance about research project objectives, undertakes scientific or engineering research requiring substantial originality, creativity and innovation and the application of expert scientific or engineering knowledge. Has proven capacity to identify research opportunities consistent with Business Unit s objectives. Considerable ability in research planning, execution and or ability to implement research results. The scientist s or engineer s research has had a significant influence on their field of research. Typically provides scientific or engineering leadership to more junior colleagues. May plan and provide project leadership to meet objectives and seek, allocate and monitor resources. OR Functions as a senior specialist. Level 8 Under broad guidance about objectives, assists in the overall strategic management of a Business Unit or manages a major scientific, engineering or administrative program. This requires a high degree of resource management and leadership ability. Has extensive expert knowledge of their field, and outstanding ability in planning and executing programs and implementing results. Typically provides expert scientific, engineering or administrative leadership to colleagues, with significant conceptual and creative input. Plans at the program level, comprising a range of related projects, to meet objectives. Seeks, allocates and monitors substantial resources. Has a major role in negotiating more complex, sensitive or contentious issues. OR Under broad guidance about research program objectives, undertakes outstanding scientific or engineering research requiring a high degree of originality, creativity and innovation. The scientist s or engineer s achievements represent a substantial advancement in scientific knowledge or for industry or for the community. Has extensive scientific or engineering   CSIRO Enterprise Agreement 2020 2023 73 knowledge, and outstanding ability in research planning, execution and or implementing research results. Typically has an international reputation in a significant field of science or engineering or industrial application and provides expert scientific or engineering leadership to research colleagues. May plan at the program level, typically for multiple projects, to meet objectives and seek, allocate and monitor resources. May have a major role in negotiating complex, sensitive or contentious issues. OR Functions as a senior specialist. Note Special promotion criteria apply to advancement within this level. Level 9 Responsible for the management of a research division or equivalent group. This requires outstanding strategic and resource management, and leadership and communication ability, coupled with sound understanding of the commercial application of scientific and technological innovations. Has extensive expert scientific, engineering or administrative knowledge, and outstanding ability in planning, execution and implementing results, combined with significant entrepreneurial skill. Provides pivotal leadership reflecting considerable vision matched by strategic planning skills, achievement, drive and focus on outcomes. Seeks, allocates, monitors and is accountable for very substantial human, financial and material resources. Carries overall responsibility for negotiating complex, sensitive and contentious issues. OR Has such eminence in a significant field of science or engineering that appointment as a CSIRO Fellow is warranted. OR Functions as a senior specialist. Note Special promotion criteria apply to advancement within this level.   CSIRO Enterprise Agreement 2020 2023 74 SCHEDULE 6 CSIRO SALARY SCALES Rates include annual leave loading CSOF Level prior to operation of EA 1st increase 2 pa Premium step pa 2nd increase 2 pa Premium Step pa 3rd increase 2 pa Premium Step pa 1.1 40,686 41,500 42,330 43,177 1.2 41,725 42,560 43,411 44,279 1.3 42,761 43,616 44,488 45,378 1.4 43,800 44,676 45,570 46,481 1.5 44,839 45,736 46,651 47,584 1 Max 45,878 46,796 50,072 47,732 51,073 48,687 52,095 2.1 47,622 48,574 49,545 50,536 2.2 49,342 50,329 51,336 52,363 2.3 51,062 52,083 53,125 54,188 2.4 52,782 53,838 54,915 56,013 2.5 54,501 55,591 56,703 57,837 2.6 56,223 57,347 58,494 59,664 2.7 57,941 59,100 60,282 61,488 2.8 59,665 60,858 62,075 63,317 2 Max 61,383 62,611 66,994 63,863 68,333 65,140 69,700 3.1 63,594 64,866 66,163 67,486 3.2 65,788 67,104 68,446 69,815 3.3 67,952 69,311 70,697 72,111 3.4 70,114 71,516 72,946 74,405 3.5 72,282 73,728 75,203 76,707 3.6 74,444 75,933 77,452 79,001 3.7 76,610 78,142 79,705 81,299 3.8 78,774 80,349 81,956 83,595 3 Max 80,937 82,556 88,335 84,207 90,101 85,891 91,903 4.1 83,687 85,361 87,068 88,809 4.2 86,434 88,163 89,926 91,725 4.3 89,183 90,967 92,786 94,642 4.4 91,930 93,769 95,644 97,557 4 Max 94,679 96,573 103,333 98,504 105,399 100,474 107,507 5.1 98,735 100,710 102,724 104,778 5.2 102,794 104,850 106,947 109,086 5 Max 106,848 108,985 116,614 111,165 118,947 113,388 121,325 6.1 113,338 115,605 117,917 120,275 6.2 119,827 122,224 124,668 127,161 6.3 126,320 128,846 131,423 134,051 6 Max 132,811 135,467 144,950 138,176 147,848 140,940 150,806 7.1 136,437 139,166 141,949 144,788 7.2 140,070 142,871 145,728 148,643 7.3 143,697 146,571 149,502 152,492 7.4 147,322 150,268 153,273 156,338 7 Max 150,956 153,975 164,753 157,055 168,049 160,196 171,410 8.1 162,800 166,056 169,377 172,765 8.2 174,644 178,137 190,607 181,700 194,419 185,334 198,307 8.3 189,524 193,314 206,846 197,180 210,983 201,124 215,203 8 Max 204,400 208,488 223,082 212,658 227,544 216,911 232,095 9.1 213,410 217,678 222,032 226,473 9.2 222,415 226,863 231,400 236,028 9.3 231,422 236,050 240,771 245,586 9 Max 240,426 245,235 250,140 255,143   CSIRO Enterprise Agreement 2020 2023 75 