 HBP_DPM_20191105 Pu Public 5 Nov 2019 Page 1 71 Data Policy Manual Title Data Policy Manual Date 15 Nov 2018 Partner Responsible Data Governance Working Group SP WP Task Involved All SPs Authors Data Governance Working Group, with substantial contributions by Kevin MCGILLIVRAY UIO P81 , Bernd STAHL DMU P16 , Martin TELEFONT EPFL P1 , Katrine ORE UIO P81 , Jeff MULLER EPFL P1 , Jan BJAALIE UIO P81 , Colin MCMURTRIE ETHZ P18 , Tyr FOTHERGILL DMU P16 William KNIGHT P16 Contributors SP12 EAB Editors Bernd STAHL DMU P16 , Tyr FOTHERGILL DMU P16 Document Approval Status Version Date Comments 30.03.2017 Initial draft 30.11.2017 First complete draft 15.12.2017 Internal review of parts I, II, and III complete 15.01.2018 Revision by section authors, members of Data Governance Working Group 30.01.2018 Internal review of parts IV and V complete 01.02.2018 External review of parts I, II, and III complete 28.02.2018 External review of parts IV and V complete 16.03.2018 Revision of entire manual by section authors, members of Data Governance Working Group V1.0 26.03.2018 Preparation for submission at the end of SGA1 1.08.2018 SGA2 Revision following SGA1 Ethics Review 17.10.2018 The DMP was presented to the EAB at the HBP Summit in Maastricht in October 2018. The EAB was positive to the development, but expressed that they did not have the time or expertise to approve the DPM. 21.01.2019 Approval by SIB 04.02.2019 Approval by DIR 02.09.2019 Removal of Data Custodian term in Definitions, and removal of reference to Retrospective Consent in 3.10, as per the M12 ethics review. 16.09.2019 Addition of a table of contents. V1.1 25.10.2019 Changes to the text as follows   HBP_DPM_20191105 Pu Public 5 Nov 2019 Page 2 71 Update of definition of Dual Use and addition of the term Misuse in Section 1.3 Definitions Addition of Section 3.6 Data related Risks and their Management in the HBP. This change seeks to address requirements from the M12 Ethics Review to clarify the risk minimisation policies and how they are reflected in the DPM. Table of Contents 1. Introduction 4 1.1 Structure and Purpose of the Data Policy Manual 5 1.2 Abbreviations and Acronyms 5 1.3 Definitions 6 2. Classification of Data and Resulting Requirements 8 2.1 Types of Data 8 2.2 Ethical Requirements Based on Source Organism 8 Part I 10 3. Data Protection Guidance and Policy in the HBP 10 3.1 Application, terminology and Icons 10 3.2 Data Protection Law in the EU 12 3.3 Risk Based and Scalable Approach to the GDPR 12 3.4 Material Scope and Application of European Data Protection Law Processing of Personal Data .. 12 3.4.1 Personal data in the HBP 13 3.4.2 Special categories sensitive personal data 15 3.4.3 Territorial Application of the GDPR to the HBP 17 3.5 Data Processors and Data Controllers Roles and Responsibilities 17 3.5.1 Data Controllers in the HBP 18 3.5.2 Data processors in the HBP 19 3.6 Data Related Risks and their Management in the HBP 20 3.6.1 Risk Management at the Project Level 20 3.6.2 Risk Management at the Task Level 21 3.6.3 Risk Management at the Partner Level 21 3.7 Data processing agreements and SP Controllers 21 3.8 Principles Relating to Data Quality and Application to the HBP 23 3.8.1 Data must be processed fairly, lawfully, and transparently. 23 3.8.2 Purpose specification and limitation principle 24 3.8.3 Data minimisation 25 3.8.4 Data accuracy and quality 25 3.8.5 Storage limitation and deletion 26 3.8.6 Integrity and Confidentiality 27 3.8.7 Accountability principle. 28 3.8.8 Accountability in the HBP 28 3.9 Legal basis for lawful Processing of Personal Data 30 3.9.1 UK ico PrivacyPolicy 33 3.10 Scientific Research 33 3.10.1 General application of the GDPR to scientific research 34 3.10.2 Legal Basis for Scientific Research 34 3.11 Consent in Scientific Research 35 3.11.1 Consent in research 35 3.11.2 Impact on Broad Consent 37 3.11.3 Withdrawal of consent 37 3.12 Relevant Scientific Research SR Derogations by Member State 38 3.13 Data protection by design and default 41   HBP_DPM_20191105 Pu Public 5 Nov 2019 Page 3 71 3.14 Individual Rights 42 3.14.1 The right to be informed 43 3.14.2 The right of access 44 3.14.3 The right to rectification 44 3.14.4 The right to erasure right to be forgotten 45 3.14.5 The right to restrict processing 45 3.14.6 The right to data portability 46 3.14.7 The right to object 46 3.14.8 Rights in relation to automated decision making and profiling 47 3.15 Data Protection Officer 47 3.16 Documentation Requirements 49 3.17 Data Breach 49 3.18 Data Protection Impact Assessment DPIA 51 3.18.1 Carrying out a DPIA Methodology 52 4. Data Anonymisation 54 5. International data Transfers 57 5.1 Privacy Shield 57 5.2 Appropriate safeguards 58 5.2.1 Standard contractual clauses 58 5.2.2 Binding corporate rules 58 5.3 Derogations 58 Part II Data Contribution and Model Organism Data Animal Data 60 6. Model Organism Data 60 6.1 Data Contributors 60 6.2 HBP storage and Knowledge Graph 61 6.3 Data Registration 61 6.4 Ethics compliance animal data 63 6.5 Data Licensing 64 DPM Inventories and Worksheets 65 Inventory I Controller SP Documentation Worksheet 65 Inventory II DPIA Template 71 Inventory III Data Protection by Design and Data Protection by Default 71 Inventory IV General Security of Personal Data Inventory 71   HBP_DPM_20191105 Pu Public 5 Nov 2019 Page 4 71 1. Introduction The Human Brain Project HBP is developing an ICT infrastructure for neuroscience. The HBP is centrally concerned with the collection, analysis, and dissemination of a broad range of different types of data. In addition to the scientific challenges that this work raises, ethical challenges and issues of legal rights and obligations are also present. As a highly visible and publicly funded European project, the HBP must demonstrate compliance with legislation and show an active engagement with good practice and the state of the art. As a world leading project, the HBP has the ambition to be at the forefront of questions of international collaboration in ICT and neuroscience and to develop standards in the use and exchange of data. This Data Policy Manual DPM expresses the policies that the HBP has developed to realise these ambitions. In more detail, the HBP adopts the policies set out in this document in order to Facilitate the formal publication of data sets, as well as enabling the tracking of their usage through citation, data licenses, and ethical approvals. Support transparency and openness of the research it undertakes. Ensure continuing availability of data with the intent of securing sustainable long term use, teaching, further research, public access, reproducibility, etc. . Ensure that expectations with regard to data handling are transparent and accessible. Comply with all data related regulations and legislation, in particular those related to data protection. Implement standards for demonstrating compliance and accountability through Data Protection Impact Assessments DPIAs and other tools. Ensure that all data registered and used in the HBP comply with ethical and legal requirements. The policies outlined in this document were prepared by the Data Governance Working Group and adopted by the DIR and SIB. This document further aims to reconcile ethical and legal requirements with the FAIR Guiding Principles for scientific data management and stewardship and implementation level policies described in the Research Data Alliance RDA Practical Policy document. This RDA document recommends defining the following minimum policies 1 Contextual metadata extraction policies if any 2 Data access control policies 3 Data backup policies 4 Data format control policies if any will be optional, many data repositories will be format agnostic 5 Data retention policies must be supported by the Terms of Service for the data repository 6 Disposition Data lifecycle and archiving policies 7 Notification policies 8 Restricted searching policies 9 Storage cost policies 10 Use agreement policies The DPM refers to all data used and collected in the HBP and is intended to be a standard setting document throughout the HBP. Whilst the use of data in and through the NIP Neuroinformatics Platform is a primary focus, the policies are in most cases comprehensive insofar as they are relevant to universal structures with which the HBP must comply e.g. the EU General Data Protection Regulation and other legislation . In some areas, the HBP may create and define additional processes   HBP_DPM_20191105 Pu Public 5 Nov 2019 Page 5 71 that may exceed the requirements outlined in this document in a beyond compliance approach. However, the DPM provides an essential baseline to be applied across the project. 1.1 Structure and Purpose of the Data Policy Manual A core thread running through the HBP is compliance with all applicable domestic, European, and international regulations concerning data. Depending on whether data are human or animal, different regulatory requirements attach or apply. The point of departure and purpose of the DPM is to provide a description of the relevant HBP policy for use by HBP partners and scientists. The DPM is a living document and will be subject to changes and updates as new policies are adopted or legal requirements change. Abbreviations, definitions, and the process for categorising data and the relevant requirements or obligations are outlined in the sections below. These are followed by a flow chart for analysing many of the issues faced in the HBP. In Part I, the DPM evaluates EU data protection law and as it applies to the HBP. In short, applying the General Data Protection Regulation to the HBP is complex. Furthermore, obligations under the GDPR will vary considerably for some HBP partners. The point of departure is to provide guidance and set global standards that will serve as a starting point for increasing accountability and GDPR compliance throughout the project. Research requirements for human research that go beyond data protection are also included in this section. This aspect of the DPM is currently being updated. In Part IIPart II Data Contribution and Model Organism Data Animal Data , the DPM focuses on principles and requirements related to model organism data animal data . This section also provides an overview of data entry into the Neuroinformatics Platform NIP . 1.2 Abbreviations and Acronyms API Application Programming Interface DPO Data Protection Officer DIR Directorate, one of the governing bodies of the HBP DPIA Data Protection Impact Assessment FPA Framework Partnership Agreement GDPR General Data Protection Regulation HBP Human Brain Project MIP Medical Informatics Platform NIP Neuroinformatics Platform PI Principal Investigator PIA Privacy Impact Assessments RUP Ramp Up Phase   HBP_DPM_20191105 Pu Public 5 Nov 2019 Page 6 71 SGA1 Specific Grant Agreement 1 SGA2 Specific Grant Agreement 2 SIB Science and Infrastructure Board, the main scientific body of the HBP, which is comprised of the SP leaders and a representative of the Partnering Projects SOP Standard Operating Procedure SP Sub project, fundamental components of the HBP entitled by broad area of research e.g. SP4 Theoretical Neuroscience ToS Terms of Service agreement 1.3 Definitions The definitions provided below are generally applicable to the entire DPM. However, in some sections the definitions are expanded, for example if the definition is a term of art and has a specific meaning in the context of a particular regulation. If there is a conflict between the terms below and guidance in a specific DPM section, users should rely on the more specific term provided in the section dedicated to the topic being evaluated i.e. data protection or animal research . Term Definition Anonymous data Information which does not relate to an identified or identifiable natural person. Consortium Group of organisations that consist of all of the parties which are part of the HBP Agreements, but excluding the European Commission EC . HBP partner Any party to the HBP Agreements, excluding the European Commission EC Contributor Individuals and or institutions that produce and make available Datasets on the Platform to the Data Users Contributor Registration Process that allows Contributors to have access to HBP systems and services and make Datasets available. Data and Dataset Data is used broadly in the context of the DPM including human data, animal data, or data derived by technical work. Dataset is an identifiable collection of data, either raw or derived, and its associated metadata, including data and metadata derived from monitoring protocols, field observations, collections, laboratory analysis, camera trap images, as well as written, recorded, graphic, audiovisual or other materials in any media. A Dataset may contain software and algorithms. Data Controller The natural or legal person, public authority, agency or other body which, alone or jointly with others, determines the purposes and means of the processing of personal data. Data Processor A natural or legal person, public authority, agency or any other body which processes personal data on behalf of the controller.   HBP_DPM_20191105 Pu Public 5 Nov 2019 Page 7 71 Data Producer A natural or legal person who collects data as part of their working duties. Under their contract, they relinquish some or all of their title to a Data Custodian, typically their employer. Data Protection Officer DPO The DPO is a professional in the field of data protection and assists with monitoring of internal compliance and data protection obligations across the HBP. Data Recipient A natural or legal person, public authority, agency or another body, to which the personal data are disclosed, whether a third party or not. Data User A natural or legal person who accesses data. Dual Use According to the EU, Dual Use items are normally used for civilian purposes but may have military applications, or may contribute to the proliferation of weapons of mass destruction. The HBP Ethics Society Opinion on Responsible Dual Use uses the term dual use of concern to refer to neuroscience research and technological innovation, and brain inspired developments in information and communication technologies, for use in the political, security, intelligence and military domains, which are either directly of concern because of their potential for use that threaten the peace, health, safety, security and well being of citizens, or are undertaken without responsible regard to such potential uses. HBP The Human Brain Project under the FET Integrated Project FP7 Grant Agreement no. 604102, i.e. its ramp up phase , and its subsequent continuation under Horizon 2020 Framework Partnership Agreement n 650003, Specific Grant Agreement no. 720270, i.e. SGA1 and any following continuation of the project under Horizon 2020 or other instrument. HBP Agreements Agreements concluded in respect of the HBP, such as FP7 Grant Agreement no. 604102, the Consortium Agreement under the FP7 Grant Agreement no. 604102, the Framework Partnership Agreement no. 650003 and related Specific Grant Agreements SGAs , the HBP FPA Consortium agreement and their subsequent agreements if applicable. Metadata Data about data describes features of Data or Datasets Medical Informatics Platform MIP The Medical Informatics Platform is a sub project of the HBP consisting of a Global Open Source Platform allowing hospitals and research centers worldwide to share medical data whilst strictly preserving patient confidentiality. Misuse According to the EU, potential misuse of research results concerns research involving or generating materials, methods, technologies or knowledge that could be misused for unethical purposes. Although such research is usually carried out with benign intentions, it has the potential to harm humans, animals or the environment. Neuroinformatics Platform NIP The Neuroinformatics Platform is a sub project of the HBP SP5 . It serves as the HBP s search engine for distributed data, curated data repositories, brain atlases, and knowledge about the brain. The Platform consists of APIs for querying and a web based platform and application programming interface APIs , i.e. a set of standards, protocols, and tools for building software applications. Personal Data Data relating to an identified or identifiable natural person. Platform Systems in the HBP that focus work, research and data. HBP Platforms are historically linked to sub projects. Platforms of the HBP include Neuroinformatics Platform   HBP_DPM_20191105 Pu Public 5 Nov 2019 Page 8 71 Simulation Platform High Performance Analytics and Computing Platform Medical Informatics Platform Neuromorphic Computing Platform Neurorobotics Platform Principal Investigator An individual who represents a partner organisation in a senior role in the HBP. Typically a PI will be a task leader, work package leader, or sub project leader. A partner organisation may have more than one PI. They are best placed to determine the scientific, technical, and ethical aspects of the data and are therefore the key individuals responsible for all aspects of the data. In practice, PIs often act as Data Custodian and Data Controller with the respective rights and responsibilities described in later Policy Recommendations sections. The PI is responsible for the integrity of the research that is undertaken, including the ethical compliance component of any collected data. Furthermore, they are responsible for the appropriate treatment of research data. This includes the responsibility for ethical conduct during research leading to data, as well as a choice of appropriate later uses. They are further responsible for ensuring that researchers they employ follow the same ethical code of conduct. Data that were collected outside of the HBP needs the sponsorship of an HBP PI to be integrated into the HBP data flows. In all cases, an HBP PI must accept responsibility for the acceptability of the data. Processing Any operation or set of operations which is performed on personal data including data storage, anonymisation, data transfer, etc. Pseudonymisation Means the processing of personal data in such a manner that the personal data can no longer be attributed to a specific data subject without the use of additional information. 2. Classification of Data and Resulting Requirements HBP researchers produce and use data from a range of organismal backgrounds and in different contexts. The combinations of different types, origins, and users lead to a variety of requirements for how the data are to be treated. 2.1 Types of Data The HBP employs a multi category typing schema for data which allows filtering of data based on source organism, producer, generation processing steps, and licensing constraints. The typing classification of data happens for the most part during the initial registration process. Data processed in the HBP digital research infrastructure will retain a record that will allow newly generated data to inherit information based on processing method and source data if available. 2.2 Ethical Requirements Based on Source Organism All data hosted in the HBP digital research infrastructure must be generated in accordance with the ethical and legal principles of the EU and Member States. Key to these is the origin of the data see also the Non EU Animal Data SOP . The following figure describes which ethical issues need to be   HBP_DPM_20191105 Pu Public 5 Nov 2019 Page 9 71 considered for data that is collected from organisms. Research on organisms including humans normally requires a prior ethics review resulting in an ethics approval. Such an approval, provided by a competent national authority and acceptable in a European Member State is a requirement for the subsequent use of the data in the HBP. While all ethical protocols are controlled for their conformity to national and EU principles, in some cases, the local ethical committee i.e. that of the institution in which the research is carried out is made fully responsible for the approved version of the protocols through a silent consent mechanism no adverse comments within 30 days from submission to the national ethical committee . In this case, the code of the ethical protocol is that given by the local rather than national ethical committee. The figure shows which aspects should be considered in the ethics approval.   HBP_DPM_20191105 Pu Public 5 Nov 2019 Page 10 71 Part I 3. Data Protection Guidance and Policy in the HBP This section of the DPM focuses on human data with a primary emphasis on application of EU data protection law in the HBP. The point of departure is to provide a standard setting document for the HBP for applying the General Data Protection Regulation GDPR requirements applicable to data handling in the project. 1 In addition to legal requirements and routines, the DPM also contains data inventory worksheets to help identify and collect information regarding data processing activities across the HBP. This information is necessary for addressing the application of the GDPR, confirming the legality of data processing, assessing data protection risks, applying exceptions for scientific research, and gathering information for Data Protection Impact Assessments DPIAs . In addition to the GDPR, the DPM also takes account of guidance provided by the European Data Protection Board EDPB , which has replaced the Article 29 Working Party WP29 , and decisions of the Court of Justice for the European Union.2 Further, the DPM incorporates guidance from national data protection authorities DPAs including the CNIL in France, the Information Commissioner s Office ico in the UK, Datatilsynet in Norway, and guidance from the European Data Protection Supervisor. The DPM also considers and applies research from the legal academic sources. The DPM will be updated to reflect EDPB opinions, guidance, and judicial decisions on an ongoing basis. To remain accessible, this version of the DPM attempts to minimise legal analysis and footnotes are kept to a minimum. In some areas such as consent, opinions that are more expansive will also be made available. 3.1 Application, terminology and Icons The HBP is a large scale research project employing over 500 scientists at more than 100 universities and research institutes located across Europe and abroad e.g. Israel, Canada, and the USA . As such an extensive project, the HBP contains a wide range of personal data ranging from Human Resources data to special category data including medical records and genetic data. In short, the HBP s data footprint is massive, complex, and spread globally. At least one challenge from a data protection perspective is the organisation of the HBP. At the HBP layer , the project has infrastructure including a website, decision making bodies such as the Stakeholder Board SB , the Steering Committee of the Stakeholder Board SCSB , and the Directorate DIR in addition to dedicated scientific leadership. In addition to project management at the HBP layer, there are 12 Subprojects where research is primarily conducted and the HBP ICT platforms are developed. These subprojects are generally comprised of multiple universities or institutions. In many cases, the partners within an SP are located in several countries. For instance, examining SP5 and SP8 we have at least the following institutions in the following countries 1 Regulation EU 2016 679 of the European Parliament and of the Council of 27 April 2016 on the protection of natural persons with regard to the processing of personal data and on the free movement of such data, and repealing Directive 95 46 EC General Data Protection Regulation henceforth GDPR. Available at 2 The EDPB includes representatives from the data protection authorities of each EU member state. The EDBP adopts guidelines GDPR compliance and has endorsed several earlier guidelines opinions of the WP29. A list of endorsed opinions is available here guidelines edpb_en   HBP_DPM_20191105 Pu Public 5 Nov 2019 Page 11 71 CHUV Switzerland EPFL Switzerland Tel Aviv U. Israel Cardiff U. UK AUEB Greece Oslo University Norway Karolinska Institute Sweden EPFL Switzerland Research Centre Jülich Germany Heidelberg Collaboratory for Image Processing Germany The DPM operates primarily at the HBP layer and the SP layer , and does not broadly consider the legal obligations of the individual partners. Although it is relevant for universities and institutions, the DPM does not provide specific guidance at the institutional level. That is, the DPM does not provide all legal requirements that a hospital in Switzerland or biobank in Germany must follow to achieve GDPR compliance. Universities and institutes at that level must apply and adapt the DPM within their specific regulatory context. When referring to SPs or HBP partners , the DPM is generally referencing all 12 Subprojects SPs , all six CoDesign projects CDPs , all Partnering Projects PPs , and outside partners when applicable. This acknowledges that each of the SPs or CDPs consist of multiple institutions, each with their own data protection obligations. In many areas of the DPM, the GDPR will be applicable to all actors taking part in the HBP. The following text box and icons indicate project wide application Brief description of the requirement If the DPM has special relevance to an SP, a text box will be used followed by an explanation Determination or information relevant to SP1 Determination or information relevant to SP2 Areas where a derogation for scientific research is possible will include the following icon and a brief explanation of how the exception or allowance applies. Such exceptions will depend on the laws of the member state. Denotes a derogation or allowance relevant to scientific research per GDPR Art. 89. General references to HBP Platforms include all six of the primary ICT based platforms. These are collectively referenced as HBP Platforms or HBP infrastructure. Additionally, data protection law is applicable to the use of cloud computing services by HBP partners. A separate cloud computing policy has been drafted and is under review by the Data Governance Working Group DGWG . This policy will be added to the DPM when finalised.   HBP_DPM_20191105 Pu Public 5 Nov 2019 Page 12 71 This icon represents areas where the HBP Data Protection Officer DPO has additional guidance. 3.2 Data Protection Law in the EU In the EU, the related concepts of privacy and data protection and are granted high legal standing.3 Although the rights to privacy and data protection are qualified and balanced against other rights and interests, including those of national security and public safety, they nevertheless are weighted heavily.4 Since the HBP project began in 2013, EU data protection law has undergone significant changes. In particular, the longstanding Data Protection Directive5 was replaced by the General Data Protection Regulation GDPR , which entered into force in 2016 and was applied from 25 May 2018. The GDPR is designed to harmonise EU data protection law and to apply directly and uniformly across all EU member states. Although the GDPR allows for derogations some of which are directly applicable to the HBP the overall result is greater harmonisation of data protection law across the EU. While the move from the Directive to the GDPR is important for the HBP, the GDPR does not completely break from the moorings set out in the Directive. Therefore, SPs that were compliant with the Directive will only need to make minimal changes to comply with the GDPR. However, SPs that were not compliant with the Directive have substantial ground to cover in order to meet their compliance burden under the GDPR. 3.3 Risk Based and Scalable Approach to the GDPR Like the Directive, the GDPR remains a principle based legislative instrument and requires interpretation. Applying the GDPR to the HBP is an ongoing process. Furthermore, the GDPR takes a risk based approach , and obligations are scalable. Therefore, what is required will depend to some extent on the processing activities, the data controller, the type of data, and the overall risks to the data subject. In many instances, application of the GDPR will require a case by case assessment. For example, it is not possible to provide one data retention schedule for the entire HBP. Deletion of data will depend on the legal basis and the purposes of processing, among other factors. Similarly, security requirements for processing special categories or sensitive personal data will be more exacting than requirements for personal data. 3.4 Material Scope and Application of European Data Protection Law Processing of Personal Data In determining whether activities fall within the material scope of the GDPR, two elements must be evaluated. 3 See Articles 7 and 8 of the Charter of Fundamental Rights of the European Union. See also Article 8 of the European Convention on Human Rights. 4 GDPR Art 2 2 . See also GDPR Recital 4. 5 Directive 95 46 EC of the European Parliament and of the Council of 24 October 1995 on the protection of individuals with regard to the processing of personal data and on the free movement of such data, OJ L 281, 31 50 henceforth the Directive .   HBP_DPM_20191105 Pu Public 5 Nov 2019 Page 13 71 First, the data must be processed .6 The processing of personal data includes ...any operation or set of operations which is performed on personal data .7 Data protection law takes a much broader view of processing than is generally used by technologists and even storage of data is considered processing. Based on the broad definition, effectively all ICT platforms used in the HBP will meet the definition of processing for GDPR purposes. In addition to storage, the process of anonymising data is also considered processing. There has been some confusion in SPs regarding when processing occurs. For example, some partners have wrongfully assumed that the GDPR does not apply to raw data or survey data until it is entered into a spreadsheet or database. This position is incorrect. As a rule of thumb, any storage or use of data will be considered processing. Second, the data must be personal . 8 The intention of focusing on personal data is to protect the rights of the data subject. That is, the identified or identifiable natural person data subject to which the data being processed and collected refers.9 This protection is limited to natural living persons and thus does not include legal or deceased persons. An additional category falling outside of the scope of GDPR application is anonymised data. If data are anonymised, they are no longer considered personal.10 However, given the difficulty in creating truly anonymous datasets, the bar for anonymisation has been set extremely high. Therefore, effectively using this exception in practice is difficult. With certain types of data, such as genetic information, it is unlikely that the data can ever be made anonymous. 3.4.1 Personal data in the HBP General Personal Data in the HBP Names, telephone numbers, email addresses, identification numbers, account related data such as Human Resources data, location data, IP addresses. Research Related Personal Data in the HBP Data concerning health, medical records, genetic data, biometric data, survey data and the results of questionnaires.11 Data NOT Regulated by GDPR in the HBP 1 animal data, 2 data from legal persons such as corporations, 3 data of deceased persons, 4 anonymised data, 5 The GDPR contains additional exceptions for purely personal or household activity. However, these exceptions will have little if any application in the HBP. Even if data fall into a category outside of the GDPR, it is important to evaluate the data broadly. Although the data at issue may not be personal, related data might be personal. For example, 6 GDPR Art 2 1 . Applies to the processing of personal data . GDPR Art 4 2 . See Case C 230 14, Weltimmo s.r.o. v Nemzeti Adatvédelmi és Információszabadság Hatóság 2015 , 37 . 7ibid. See Google Spain SL, Google Inc v Agencia Espannola de Proteccion de Datos AEPD , Mario Costeja Gonzalez 2014 , 28 . Examples of data processing in the search engine context. 8 GDPR Art 2 1 . 9 GDPR Art 4 1 . 10 GDPR Recital 26. 11 GDPR Art 4 13 15 . Defining genetic data , biometric data , and data concerning health. See further GDPR Art 9.   HBP_DPM_20191105 Pu Public 5 Nov 2019 Page 14 71 although data regarding animals are not personal data, records of researchers submitting ethics authorisations are personal data when the authorisations include names, email addresses, or even an ID number that can be used to identify a researcher. If it becomes possible to de anonymise data, the data will become personal and the GDPR is applicable. Therefore, SPs must take a risk based approach to re identification. This requires considering what is possible today in addition to what means might be used in the future to re identify an individual. For example, consider the impact of big data analytics. Many of the tools and insights under development in the HBP are exactly the type of tools that might be used to make re identification possible. Animal data GDPR is not applicable. Records of researchers submitting ethics authorisations GDPR is applicable when that data are personal General Personal Data as defined above GDPR is applicable Research Related Personal Data as defined above GDPR is applicable Sensitive Personal Data GDPR is applicable General Personal Data as defined above GDPR is applicable Anonymised data GDPR not applicable, but see risks related to anonymisation above. Animal data GDPR is not applicable. Records of researchers submitting ethics authorisations GDPR is applicable when data are personal Research Related Personal Data as defined above GDPR is applicable Sensitive Personal Data GDPR is applicable. General Personal Data as defined above GDPR is applicable Anonymised data GDPR not applicable, but see risks related to anonymisation. Research Related Personal Data as defined above GDPR is applicable General Personal Data as defined above GDPR is applicable Animal data GDPR is not applicable. Data of deceased persons e.g. ex vivo data GDPR is not applicable. Records of researchers submitting ethics authorisations GDPR is applicable when data are personal General Personal Data as defined above GDPR is applicable Anonymised data GDPR not applicable, but see risks related to anonymisation. Animal data GDPR is not applicable. Records of researchers submitting ethics authorisations GDPR is applicable when data are personal Research Related Personal Data as defined above GDPR is applicable General HBP data as defined above GDPR is applicable   HBP_DPM_20191105 Pu Public 5 Nov 2019 Page 15 71 General HBP data as defined above GDPR is applicable. In particular, user account information. Records of researchers submitting ethics authorisations GDPR is applicable when data are personal Research Related Personal Data as defined above GDPR is applicable Sensitive Personal Data GDPR is applicable e.g. patient records on the MIP local . General Personal Data as defined above GDPR is applicable Anonymised data GDPR not applicable, but see risks related to anonymisation. Research Related Personal Data as defined above GDPR is applicable Sensitive Personal Data GDPR is applicable e.g. biometric voice data General Personal Data as defined above GDPR is applicable General HBP data as defined above GDPR is applicable. In particular, user account information. General HBP data as defined above GDPR is applicable. In particular, user account information. General HBP data as defined above GDPR is applicable. In particular, user account information. This also includes personal data collected to ethics submissions. Research Related Personal Data as defined above GDPR is applicable. In particular, survey data and the results of questionnaires depending on subject matter. 3.4.2 Special categories sensitive personal data The GDPR provides that the processing of personal data revealing racial or ethnic origin genetic data, biometric data for the purpose of uniquely identifying a natural person, data concerning health or data concerning a natural person s sex life or sexual orientation shall be prohibited. 12 In some instances, minutes of HBP governing bodies might also be considered sensitive personal data. In particular, where such minutes reveal personal data related to racial or ethnic origin, political opinions, or other categories of sensitive personal data. Possible Scientific Allowance GDPR Art 9 2 j providing a legal basis for processing special categories of data in some circumstances.13 Possible additional Limits GDPR Art 9 4 allowing member states to introduce further conditions, including limits, regarding the processing of genetic data, biometric data or data concerning health. 12 GDPR Art 9. 13 To apply GDPR Art 9 2 j you must also have a legal basis under GDPR Art 6 e.g. 6 1 e or f .   HBP_DPM_20191105 Pu Public 5 Nov 2019 Page 16 71 There are exceptions to the prohibition i.e. explicit consent that are evaluated further in the legal basis section below. No sensitive personal data Genetic data data concerning health data concerning health Data concerning health Biometric data voice identification Survey data and the results of questionnaires may concern health SPs are responsible for processing all personal data in a GDPR compliant manner. If data does not fall into a clearly excluded category under the GDPR e.g. animal data, data from deceased persons then the SP must comply with the GDPR. When relying on anonymisation, SPs must take a broad approach in their determination and consider all the means reasonably likely to be used to identify the individual. The GDPR applies broadly and is not limited to medical records and genetic data. Contact details such as email information and IP addresses are also personal data. The inventory below is a tool of SPs to evaluate the data they have in their project as personal. Data Processing Inventory Data Types Personal Data and non Personal data Fill in the following categories. For further explanation, see the DPM. 1. Does the subproject, research, or administrative activity process personal data This includes names, telephone numbers, email addresses, identification numbers, account related data such as human resources data and billing information, location data, IP addresses. 2. Does the subproject or research activity process sensitive personal data This includes Data concerning health, medical records, genetic data, biometric data, and in some instances, survey data and the results of questionnaires.   HBP_DPM_20191105 Pu Public 5 Nov 2019 Page 17 71 If the Answer to 1 or 2 is yes, the GDPR is applicable. If you answered yes to 2 , the data are special category data and processing will require an additional legal basis GDPR Article 9 . If the subproject, research, or administrative activity concerns animal data, data from legal persons, data of deceased persons, or anonymised data the GDPR is not applicable. However, SPs must consider the following Are personal data being collected in conjunction with the non personal research data For example, do the animal data also contain the names or identification numbers that can be linked back to researchers If the Answer to 3 is yes, the GDPR will apply to related personal data. If anonymised data become de anonymised, they will be considered personal and the GDPR will apply. 3.4.3 Territorial Application of the GDPR to the HBP The GDPR applies to data controllers and data processors established in the EU. All HBP partners located in the EU are subject to the GDPR. 1. If data are transferred from outside of the EU to an HBP partner located in the EU, and the HBP partner processes that data, the GDPR is applicable to these data. For example, if a Chinese partner transfers data to SP5, and HBP partners process these data, the GDPR will apply to the data of the Chinese partner. The result is that it may be difficult to transfer these data back to the Chinese partner see data transfers . 2. The GDPR is also applicable to data controllers or processors offering goods or services in the EU or monitoring the behaviour of individuals in the EU. All HBP partners located in the EU are subject to the GDPR. 3.5 Data Processors and Data Controllers Roles and Responsibilities The GDPR assigns data processing obligations and responsibilities based largely on whether a party is a data processor or a data controller .14 The controller processor relationship largely boils down to an allocation of responsibility. Understanding these concepts and their interactions is essential to applying the GDPR to the HBP.15 The roles are defined in the GDPR as controller means the natural or legal person, public authority, agency or other body which, alone or jointly with others, determines the purposes and means of the processing of personal data processor means a natural or legal person, public authority, agency or other body which processes personal data on behalf of the controller 16 Under the GDPR, data controllers have the primary responsibility for treating the personal data entrusted to them in conformance with the law. The primary component necessary to meet the 14 GDPR Art 4 7 8 , respectively. 15 WP29 Opinion 169 1 2010 on the concepts of controller and processor 2010 1 35, 2. henceforth WP29 169 . 16 GDPR Art 4 7 8 emphasis added. See also GDPR Art 24 and 28.   HBP_DPM_20191105 Pu Public 5 Nov 2019 Page 18 71 controller designation is that the natural or legal person makes a specific determination regarding the purposes and means of data processing. Specifically, does the actor determine the how and the why of data processing The GDPR also provides for joint controllership if responsibility is shared.17 This is relevant for SPs that share and process personal data within their research areas. Joint controllers have some flexibility in allocating obligations and responsibilities, as long a full compliance is obtained.18 3.5.1 Data Controllers in the HBP Organisation The role of the HBP as a data controller or a joint controller prior to obtaining Legal Entity LE status remains an area of ongoing discussion. The HBP DPO is of the opinion that the HBP cannot avoid all data controller or joint data controller liability under the GDPR. This is likely the case even if it does not have a traditional legal form. There are several key areas where the HBP will likely be deemed a data controller or joint controller where the HBP determines the purposes and means of data processing. In particular, the complexity of the project and the wide range of data sharing it facilitates creates a complex and unclear picture for data subjects regarding the processing of their data. In many areas, the HBP provides instructions to SPs and heavily influences the purposes and means of data processing. In these areas, the DPO is of the opinion that the HBP will likely be considered a data controller or a joint controller. Following a final determination or transition to an LE, adjustments to the DPM will be required. Until that point, it assumed that the institution hospital university would be deemed data controllers and that the HBP is not a joint controller. A more expansive legal analysis of this issue is available in a memorandum on file with the DPO. As a project, the HBP is currently following a modified origin based approach to controllership. This approach obliges the SP institution hospital university to comply with the GDPR as required by their institution hospital university and the laws of their member state. When submitting data to HBP Platforms, such as the SP5 NIP or the SP8 MIP, partners are required to certify that the data they are providing is in compliance with the GDPR along with all other ethical compliance requirements. In most cases, data subjects will contact the hospital or institution to ask questions, exercise individual rights, or withdraw consent. However, platform providers and the HBP partners generally must also assist data subjects in addressing questions, complaints, or concerns regarding data processing in the project. General categorisations Determining controllership requires a specific analysis of the data processing that takes place. However, some general classifications are applicable to the HBP Institutions universities hospitals collecting and processing personal data will be data controllers and are responsible for compliance. As platform operators HBP partners will generally be considered controllers or joint controllers, depending on their actions and data processing operations. Cloud service providers and IT hosting providers will be considered data processors. All HBP partners will have some data controller liability. Whether the personal data is contact information, location data, or sensitive personal data, the SP or partner is required to meet legal requirements. General guidelines that HBP partners can generally apply with SPs are 17 GDPR Art 26. 18 GDPR Art 26 1 . See also WP29 169 2010 24.   HBP_DPM_20191105 Pu Public 5 Nov 2019 Page 19 71 1. The SP partner collecting names and email addresses for a conference webinar will be a data controller regarding that information. 2. The SP partner collecting human resources data personal data such as account numbers, names and email addresses of employees, and other personal data necessary to administer the project will be a data controller. 3. The local hospital or institution that collects personal data and has access control over data will be the data controller for that information. This includes sensitive data such as human data, medical records, and biometric data. 4. Researchers using surveys will be responsible for personal data collected as part of that research. 5. In many cases, individual institutions provide data that they will share for research purposes with other SP partners. If two or more controllers jointly determine the purposes and means of processing , they may be considered joint controllers. The partners will have responsibility for their individual processing. 3.5.2 Data processors in the HBP To qualify as a processor, two conditions must be met. First, the party must be a separate legal entity from the controller. Second, the processor must process data only on documented instructions from the controller. 19 Being deemed a data processor has several advantages including a favourable apportionment of liability. However, the practice of attempting to designate the controller and processor roles in contract terms e.g. ToUs ToS will not negate responsibility under the GDPR. That is, contracts providing that a partner or even the HBP will always be deemed a processor are ineffective and do not negate the requirements set out by the GDPR. The GDPR places requirements on parties based on their actual roles or conduct in data processing operations and not simply on the labels they give themselves. Therefore, looking at what the parties actually do, rather than how they define their roles contractually, is dispositive when applying the GDPR. Processors now have direct responsibilities and obligations under the GDPR and can be held directly responsible for non compliance with these obligations. Example If SP7 partners only provide access to infrastructure, they will be considered data processor for those purposes. If SP7 partners process login data e.g. researcher credentials , it will be deemed a data controller for those purposes. HBP subclass Data Repository Service Operator In the HBP, this role can be seen as a specific subclass of Data Processor which installs and operates a service used by another Data Controller or Data Producer. While not defined in the GDPR, the Data Repository Service Operator is a common label used in the HBP and it should be clear that this should be considered a GDPR Data Processor. 19 GDPR Art 28 3 a .   HBP_DPM_20191105 Pu Public 5 Nov 2019 Page 20 71 3.6 Data Related Risks and their Management in the HBP There are risks associated with handling any type of data, personal or otherwise. The Human Brain Project has implemented several processes, structures and workflows to ensure that such risks are managed appropriately at the Project, Sub Project and Partner levels. 3.6.1 Risk Management at the Project Level The Risk Register tracks and manages the SP and Project Level risks the risk register links risks to Work Package s that are first impacted if the risk materialises, Key Result s that are affected if the risk materialises, consequences and effects of risks materialising, relevant mitigations measures, identifies a risk tracker and a systematic risk evaluation schedule. The Risk Register currently details two data related risks in the HBP Risk id Risk and Consequences deprecated Short name of risk Description of risk R0.7 Failure to ensure data governance compliance Data governance compliance failure A failure to ensure data governance compliance presents ethical and legal risks to those producing and registering data and those with downstream access e.g. through the Knowledge Graph as well as a reputational risk to the HBP, and thus presents a potential risk to all WPs and KRs. R0.8 Data security Data privacy for personally identifiable information Breach of data protection law Several risks Data breach, de anonymization, failure to apply data protection principles, processing exceeds legal basis, failure to comply with GDPR. Failure to obtain data processing agreements, adequate safeguards in place in the event of Brexit, among many others. In the case of a no deal Brexit, the UK will be deemed a third country under the GDPR. As a result, without additional measures in place, it will be unlawful to transfer data to UK partners For R0.7 Failure to ensure data governance compliance the proposed mitigation for this risk is Constitution of the project wide Data Governance Working Group who will develop data governance policies and data audit committee processes for approval by the governing bodies of the HBP. Once approved, these policies and processes are to be disseminated to project institutions who will implement policies in keeping with their research infrastructure and allow the Project to mitigate this risk. For R0.8 Data security Data privacy for personally identifiable information the proposed mitigation for this risk is   HBP_DPM_20191105 Pu Public 5 Nov 2019 Page 21 71 There are services in the HBP which handle personal information like contact information and collaborative project content. These data are access controlled within the framework of the services and unauthorised access is disallowed. With respect to privacy sensitive research data, human medical data without broad releases will only be stored at hospitals and used in SP8 services. All data security and privacy are governed under the HBP Data Policy Manual, which is a living document which has a pending update which would prepare it for public dissemination. Mitigation measures include both organisational and technical measures. In addition to protection at the HBP level, data in the Project are also subject to institutional security policies i.e. the hospitals, universities, and other institutions have their own data security data protection policies in addition to HBP requirements . The HBP is currently drafting Standard Contractual Clauses SCCs to be signed by all Partners on or before the 31st of January in the event of a no deal Brexit. Both of the above risks are classed as High Priority and so are updated through a Risk Reassessment every month. 3.6.2 Risk Management at the Task Level At the Sub Project and Task level, the Ethics Compliance Section 6.4 of this document , Data Governance and Data Protection processes and structures detailed throughout this document, the Data Governance Working Group and the Ethics Compliance SOP, represent the steps that the HBP takes to manage the data risks posed by individual HBP Tasks. 3.6.3 Risk Management at the Partner Level Finally, the individual HBP partner institutions are expected to manage their own partner level risks posed by the data they handle. The HBP DPO and other ethics and data protection services in the HBP can offer advice and support if requested, but the partners are ultimately responsible for those risks. 3.7 Data processing agreements and SP Controllers In most cases, SP controllers must have a data processing contract in place before enlisting a processor.20 SP controllers may only enlist data processors that provide sufficient guarantees. SP partners must include the following general details in their contract with data processor the subject matter and duration of the processing, the nature and purpose of the processing, the type of personal data and categories of data subject, and the obligations and rights of the controller. Specific contractual obligations include the following 21 the processor must only act on the written instructions of the controller HBP partner s 22 the processor is committed to confidentiality requirements.23 the processor must take appropriate measures to ensure the security of processing24 20 GDPR Art 28 3 . 21 Requirements are based on GDPR Art 28 3 a c . 22 GDPR Art 28 3 a . 23 GDPR Art 28 3 b . 24 GDPR Art 28 3 c . Including security measures as required per GDPR Art 32.   HBP_DPM_20191105 Pu Public 5 Nov 2019 Page 22 71 the processor may only subcontract engages a subprocessor with prior specific or general written authorisation of the controller 25 the processor must assist the data controller in allowing data subjects to exercise their rights under the GDPR the processor must also assist the controller in ensuring compliance with GDPR obligations, including security, data breach, and data protection affect assessments DPIAs 26 the processor deletes or returns all the personal data to the controller after the relationship ends 27 and the processor makes information available to the controller to assist with audits and inspections.28 The contractual requirements contained in GDPR Article 28 are extremely prescriptive.29 Although the EC has not yet provided a standard data processing contract, it is likely that standard agreements will eventually be made available. A sample model agreement is available here.30 SPs should note that not all providers offer a data sharing contract. This is often the case for US based free cloud services. The HBP cloud computing policy evaluates this issue and will be included in the DPM inventories and worksheets when it is approved. 25 GDPR Art 28 2 . 26 GDPR Art 28 3 f . 27 GDPR Art 28 3 g . This end of contract requirement applies unless Union or Member State law requires storage of the personal data. 28 GDPR Art 28 3 h . 29 GDPR Art 28 5 . 30   HBP_DPM_20191105 Pu Public 5 Nov 2019 Page 23 71 3.8 Principles Relating to Data Quality and Application to the HBP As adopted, the GDPR principles relating to the processing of personal data closely follow the approach taken in the Directive. These principles make up the core of data protection law in the EU and must be incorporated into the HBP as a whole and accounted for throughout the SPs. The following part describes the principles generally and then provides examples of how they might be accounted for the in the HBP. All SPs are responsible for adhering to and incorporating the principles of data protection. 3.8.1 Data must be processed fairly, lawfully, and transparently Of particular import is the principle that data must be processed lawfully, fairly and in a transparent manner... .31 Despite its somewhat vague character, this principle is fundamental to data protection and is applicable to all other principles described in this section. Lawfully for processing to be lawful , the controller must have a specific and appropriate legal basis for the data processing for the entire period of processing. This also includes following general legal requirements such as confidentiality requirements and contract terms. SPs must have a legal basis for processing of personal data e.g. performance of a contract, legal obligation, and legitimate interest, among others . Although these are expanded upon in the next section, for much of the research conducted in the HBP the legal basis is consent. Depending on the data processed by the SP partners, legal requirements will also vary. For example, many member states have confidentiality requirements for medical records or medical data independent of the GDPR. A breach of such confidentiality requirements also amounts to a breach of the lawfulness principle. Fairly In additional to having an appropriate legal basis for processing, the HBP SP partners must also process data fairly. Fairness requires that the party processing personal data e.g. the controller or processor does not act unreasonably and takes into account the interests and rights of the data subject. For example, failing to provide the data subject with adequate information regarding the technology used in the processing, thus reducing their ability to control and make decisions about the processing, is likely unfair. Repurposing, selling, or reusing data in a manner that goes beyond the consent provided by the data subject is clearly unfair. Furthermore, failure to provide adequate or complete information, or to otherwise process data in a manner inconsistent with a privacy policy or contract is also unfair. Transparency As a key concept running throughout the GDPR, the element of transparency is essential to the fair and legitimate processing of data. At the concept s core is the notion that the data subject must be provided with adequate and accurate information regarding processing activities. 31 GDPR Art 5 1 a .   HBP_DPM_20191105 Pu Public 5 Nov 2019 Page 24 71 Transparency in the HBP SP partners should maintain and provide data subjects e.g. research participants with clear information about 1. The identity of the controller e.g. name of hospital institution and contact information . If there are multiple controllers, or joint controllers, this information should also be provided. 2. The legal basis for processing. If the legal basis is consent, the data subject should be informed on the procedure for withdrawing consent. 3. The purposes of the processing e.g. medical research . This should be made as clear as possible, particularly if the data might be processed in ways the data subject might not expect. 4. The extent of processing. If the data will be processed by users outside of the hospital institution or made accessible to third parties, the data subject must be informed. Even if the data will be anonymised before it is shared, the data subject must be made aware of that process so they might assess the associated risks. 5. Provide information on how data subjects can exercise their rights rectification, erasure etc. . In particular, provide data subjects with contact information for their Data Protection Officer DPO . The above information must be provided to the data subject in a clear and accessible manner, for example, as part of the informed consent. The HBP website should also provide this information. 3.8.2 Purpose specification and limitation principle The GDPR requires that data be collected for specified, explicit and legitimate purposes and not further processed in a manner that is incompatible with those purposes .32 Compliance requires that a sufficiently narrow purpose for data processing must be set prior to the collection of personal data. Data collection must not exceed what is necessary to fulfil that purpose. Any further use of the data must be compatible with the original purpose. Central factors for this evaluation include the relationship between the purposes, context and reasonable expectation of the data subject, nature of the data, and safeguards. If data are processed in a manner that is incompatible with the purpose for which it was initially obtained, the processing is unlawful.33 If data are used for a purpose beyond that for which it was collected, it is considered to have been repurposed . Repurposing data might include acts such as selling personal information for advertising purposes or other acts beyond the consent provided by the data subject.34 All SP partners must set a purpose for data processing and limit processing to that purpose Clearly identify the purpose for the data processing e.g. scientific research, completion of a contract, dissemination before processing begins. Limit the amount of data collected to what is necessary to fulfil the purpose. 32 GDPR Art 5 1 b and GDPR Recital 39. 33 GDPR Art 6 4 . An incompatible purpose i.e. repurposed data cannot be later legitimised by changing to a new legal basis. WP29 203 2013 36. 34 GDPR Art 89.   HBP_DPM_20191105 Pu Public 5 Nov 2019 Page 25 71 Communicate the purpose of processing to data subjects. Inform data subject to any changes to the primary purpose of data processing. If further processing will take place, provide a written determination of whether the new purpose is compatible. Scientific Allowance Research conducted for scientific purposes will not be considered incompatible with the initial purposes, if the requirements of GDPR Article 89 1 have been met. These requirements are evaluated further in the Scientific Research Section. In short, if available in the SP partners member state, this is an important exception for research. 3.8.3 Data minimisation In addition to attaching a specific purpose to data collection, the principle of data minimisation requires that data collected be adequate, relevant and limited to what is necessary in relation to the purposes for which they are processed. 35 What is necessary or relevant will depend on the purpose of the data collection. Simply stated, this principle requires that controllers limit the amount of data they collect to what is necessary to fulfil the purpose set for data processing. In addition to collecting less data, once the purpose has been fulfilled, data should be deleted or anonymised. This principle is particularly important for data protection by design and by default. All SPs must implement data minimisation. This is an important aspect of the exceptions provided for scientific research. SPs must limit their data collection to that which is directly relevant from the specified purposes. Whenever possible, use anonymisation and pseudonymisation techniques. 3.8.4 Data accuracy and quality Data must also be accurate and, where necessary, kept up to date. 36 If data are not accurate, the data must be erased or corrected. If the data are inaccurate, the data subject has a right to have the data rectified or even object to the processing of data concerning them. All SP partners must implement data quality and accuracy controls. Ensure that records are accurate and kept up to data 35 GDPR Art 5 c . 36 GDPR Art 5 d .   HBP_DPM_20191105 Pu Public 5 Nov 2019 Page 26 71 Develop procedures to maintain accuracy through updates, system audits, and other procedures to check that information is accurate. Provide data subjects with the means to rectify data if they are no longer accurate. For example, on a webpage providing information on the purposes of research also provide contact information for data subjects. 3.8.5 Storage limitation and deletion Once the purpose of data collection has been completed, the general rule is that data should be erased or deleted.37 Retention periods will vary depending on the purpose of the initial collection. However, the duty applies whether the data are stored on a local hard drive or a global server farm with worldwide infrastructure. If other legal regulations limit the ability of the controller to erase the data, including bookkeeping or audit requirements, the data can be stored for longer periods. In that case, the data must be secured appropriately and erased when it becomes legally possible. This may generally be accomplished by destroying the medium or through sufficient overwriting.38 The GDPR specifies that deletion requirements should be contained in the controller processor contract.39 All SP partners must evaluate data storage limitation data retention Assess retention time needed to fulfil the purpose. If the purpose of the data processing is completed, what is your legal basis for retaining the data If the data are no longer needed, it should be securely deleted. There is no one size fits all period. In some cases, data will only be necessary for the life of the project e.g. contact information . Other data, such data committed to the MIP or NIP will be stored for much longer periods as is necessary for research. Partners may be required to keep accounting data for much longer periods that the life of the project for audit purposes. This is allowed under the GDPR, but requires a legal basis. Generally, a specific bookkeeping law or accounting requirement will be sufficient. When SP partners design systems, they should track and differentiate data storage for different purposes. They should also have in place procedures for anonymisation and deletion of data once data retention periods end. Scientific Allowance Research conducted for scientific purposes can be kept for longer periods. This requires meeting the requirements of Art. 89 1 see Scientific Research Section and applying appropriate organisational and technical measures. 37 GDPR Art 5 e . For purposes in the public interest, including archives, personal data may be stored for longer periods pursuant to GDPR Art 89 1 . 38 WP29 196 2012 12. This requires that all copies of the data, including temporary files and file fragments, be erased irretrievably 39 GDPR Art 28 3 g .   HBP_DPM_20191105 Pu Public 5 Nov 2019 Page 27 71 3.8.6 Integrity and Confidentiality Parties with access to personal data must exercise confidentiality in processing or handling such data in a manner that ensures appropriate security of the personal data, including protection against unauthorised or unlawful processing and against accidental loss, destruction or damage .40 Meeting the security principle requires that SP partners have adequate organisational policies, undergo risk assessments, and put in place technical measures to protect and ensure availability of personal data. The term security should be broadly construed and include the protection of networks and information systems on a physical and logical basis. Further, in addition to applying adequate security practices, data controllers should maintain adequate backup. Among other aspects, this requires that controllers choose processors that also offer adequate security and organisational measures. The GDPR does not provide one security requirement that will apply across the HBP. Security requirements are scalable and they will vary depending on data processing operations, the state of the art, cost of implementation, the overall risk, among other factors provided in GDPR Article 32. Although compliance requirements are not specifically prescribed, adopting certification schemes and meeting industry standards are a recognised means of meeting this requirement. In many cases, it will be appropriate to apply encryption and or pseudonymisation techniques to meet this principle. In addition to putting adequate security in place, this also requires the means to test the effectiveness of such measures. This is not a one off procedure, and a review process and the means to make improvements in security practices are necessary. SP partners must meet confidentiality, integrity and availability requirements. As a starting point Ensure that all personal data are secure. This includes data stored using cloud services and web based email services. For further information, see the HBP Cloud Computing Policy. Before adding a new technology, perform a security risk assessment and determine whether risks can be adequately mitigated. For further information, see the HBP DPIA Policy. Design and implement adequate organisational and technical measures to meet the risks. If risks cannot adequately addressed, find a new way to implement the technology or discontinue use of the service. The following risk assessment can be used for an initial evaluation and as a means document compliance with the HBP. Further measures are provided in the DPIA section. HBP Risk Assessment Risks Effects on Data subjects Sources of Risks Threats Existing or planned Security measures Severity if the risk occurs Likelihood that the risk will occur 40 GDPR Art 5 f .   HBP_DPM_20191105 Pu Public 5 Nov 2019 Page 28 71 Unlawful Access Unwanted modification to HBP Data Loss of Data Loss of Availability 3.8.7 Accountability principle The above principles remain consistent between the Directive and the GDPR. However, under the GDPR the controller is now required to demonstrate compliance with the above principles. 41 Although this principle has existed in practice in some member states and is already an element of data privacy law internationally, it is an addition to the GDPR. To meet this principle, SPs will be required to document their compliance with the above principles.42 3.8.8 Accountability in the HBP SP Controllers must be able to demonstrate compliance with the above principles. In practice, this means that SP partners must be able to document and provide evidence that they have complied with the principles. In particular, SP partners should Keep a copy of the data processing agreement they have with sub processors including cloud service provider available for audit. Show that the SP partners have implemented DGWG policies and met the requirements of the DPM. Demonstrate that appropriate security measures are in place. This includes following best practices, including applying relevant codes of conduct and meeting industry standards. If a certification has been met, documenting and maintaining the certification is appropriate. Put appropriate data protection measures in place throughout the entire lifecycle of HBP processing operations. This includes documenting that data are secured using encryption or other techniques. When the purpose for which the data are collected has ceased, document the deletion process. Keeping records of all data breaches. When required, reporting such data breaches to the relevant data protection authority is necessary. Records of DPIA, PIAs, and other procedures for reducing or limiting the risks to data subjects are essential. If a DPIA or a PIA has been completed, make a redacted copy of the information available for data subjects. Review accountability measures on an annual basis. 41 GDPR Art 5 2 . 42 GDPR Art 24 1 .   HBP_DPM_20191105 Pu Public 5 Nov 2019 Page 29 71 Although not specifically required by the GDPR, the use of icons are an effective means to communicate data collection practices and compliance with the GDPR.43 SP partners should also consider using such icons when possible to provide more accessible explanations of how they use personal data. Icons can be used as part of a privacy policy, an informed consent form, or any other place where there is an intention to communicate data protection practices to research subjects or the public. 43 Esayas S., Mahler T., McGillivray K., Is a Picture Worth a Thousand Terms Visualising Contract Terms and Data Protection Requirements for Cloud Computing Users 2016 Current Trends in Web Engineering ICWE Lecture Notes in Computer Science. Available at 46963 8_4 Sec3 .   HBP_DPM_20191105 Pu Public 5 Nov 2019 Page 30 71 3.9 Legal basis for lawful Processing of Personal Data The GDPR requires a legal basis for any processing of personal data.44 For processing to be lawful, the controller must have legitimate grounds for the duration of the processing.45 The basis for processing must be determined at the beginning of processing, and there is little flexibility for amendment after processing has begun. In the HBP, likely bases for processing activities include the following examples Consent46 Consent will generally be required for research. In some cases, it will serve as the basis used for research on personal see consent requirements for scientific research . However, consent will not always be the most appropriate legal basis and in some cases will not provide a lawful basis under the GDPR. For example, in employment situations consent will generally be invalid. Additionally, consent can be withdrawn. Therefore, SPs should consider whether one of the categories below interest might provide a more flexible and appropriate basis to support research. For public providers and universities, this will often be Performance of a contract47 If the SP partners have to complete a reimbursement and requires bank account contact information, they have a clear legal basis to do so under the basis of the performance of a contract. However, once that purpose is completed, the data should generally be deleted in the absence of another legal basis. Legal obligation48 A national law requires that the SP partners retain certain data, such as accounting data, for a specific period. In such a case, the SP partners would be able to store name and account information even after the performance of a contract was complete. Vital interests49 If processing becomes necessary to protect someone s life. Public interest official authority Research organisations that are public authorities may use this basis for conducting research.50 To use this legal basis, the SP partners must be able to show that it is necessary to process the personal data for its research purpose i.e. proportionate, reasonable, necessary and point to a clear legal supplementary basis under national law. This is often contained in a university research or national research act e.g. NHS Act 2006, UK Health and Social Care Act 2012, the the Health Research Act in Norway . As of November 2018, this is some variance in the guidance among member states on how broadly this legal basis might be used and the level of consent required in secondary data use. Much of the UK guidance suggests consent is required for research, but that data processing for GDPR purposes should rely on public interest offical authroity rather than consent. 51 In Norway, guidance suggests that consent will remain central. Legitimate interests52 Provides a flexible basis for processing personal data in way that the data subject might reasonably expect. A determination as to the legitimate interest must take place, and be documented, prior to applying this basis. SP partners relying on this legal basis should provide a written analysis addressing the following 3 elements 1. The processing is necessary to achieve that legitimate interest. For example, ethics reporting. 44 GDPR Art 6 1 a f . 45 GDPR Art 6. 46 GDPR Art 6 1 a . Consent is further defined in GDPR Art 4 11 . The conditions for lawful consent are provided in GDPR Art 7. See also GDPR Recitals 32, 33, 42, 43. 47 GDPR Art 6 1 b . 48 GDPR Art 6 1 c and GDPR Art 6 3 . See GDPR Recital 41. 49 GDPR Art 6 1 d . This is generally only applicable in matters of life or death e.g. national disasters . See Recital 46. 50 GDPR Art 6 1 e . If sensitive or special category data i.e. medical research also GDPR Art 9 2 j . 51 Guidance from UK National Working Groups on the GDPR available here. 52 GDPR Art 6 1 f . Requires balancing the identified interest against whether the processing is necessary to achieve that interest.   HBP_DPM_20191105 Pu Public 5 Nov 2019 Page 31 71 2. Balancing the data processing against the interests of third parties. Would the processing cause unjustified harm or interfere with the individual s interests, rights, or freedom. Can the data subject reasonably expect the processing to take place for this type of activity 3. Are the SP partners collecting the Minimum amount of data necessary to achieve the interest Overlap between or among these grounds is possible, and data processing activities may be justified based on one or more of the aforementioned legal grounds. Furthermore, the GDPR largely follows the approach of the Directive. Therefore, SPs will be able to continue using the legal basis they have applied to their processing. However, the GDPR places greater emphasis on accountability and documentation. For commercial research partners, this basis is often applied as the public interest offical authority is not available to private providers.53 Public authorites cannot rely on legitimate intersts. Controllers must be able to demonstrate that they have a legal basis for processing, the basis exists for the entire time of the processing, and that the processing is necessary to complete the purpose. For the processing of sensitive data, including medical data, an additional basis must be provided e.g. explicit consent .54 Choosing a basis requires consideration of the processing activities, and then selecting the most appropriate basis. HBP SP partners must have a legal basis for data processing. This information is required for the entire time data is processed. The data inventory below is a tool for determining the legal basis of data processing and accounting for data protection principles. The data inventory is also helpful for compliance with documentation requirements. 53 GDPR Art 6 1 f . If sensitive or special category data i.e. medical research also GDPR Art 9 2 j . 54 See GDPR Art. 9.   HBP_DPM_20191105 Pu Public 5 Nov 2019 Page 32 71 Data Processing Inventory Checklist Principles and Legal Basis Fill in the following categories. For further explanation, see the DPM. Principles What is the purpose of data processing a Are the data collected relevant and not excessive for this purpose b Are data used for purposes other than as initially collected c Are data stored longer than is necessary to achieve this purpose d Are data kept secure Are appropriate technical and organisational measures in place e Are data kept accurate and up to date for the purpose f Are data transferred to a non EU third country. Legal Basis What is the legal basis for data processing e.g. consent, performance of a contract, legal obligation, etc. If more than one basis, explain which basis is used to fulfil each purpose. a Did the basis exist prior to the start of processing b Will this legal basis remain during the entire period of processing As a whole, the HBP should consider effective ways of informing participants of how the HBP uses personal data, and the legal basis for data processing. Below is an example from the UK ico that clearly provides 1 the purpose of processing, 2 the data necessary for the processing, and 3 the lawful basis   HBP_DPM_20191105 Pu Public 5 Nov 2019 Page 33 71 3.9.1 UK ico PrivacyPolicy UK ico Privacy Notice 3.10 Scientific Research The GDPR provides certain allowances for data processing for scientific research purposes. 55 However, allowances or exemptions fall into the category of derogations under the GDPR.56 These derogations and their application will vary by member state, and will likely result in different legal requirements throughout the HBP and inside SPs. Not all member states have finished implementing GDPR derogations, so the extent of the differences remains to be seen. However, given the wide range of partners, and jurisdictional locations in the HBP, some variation is likely. This is an area that will require additional research and updates as the regulatory picture develops. This section first describes the exemptions generally, and then provides information on how the derogations apply in specific member states. The current HBP policy on this point is that HBP partners must follow the policies of their home countries institutions data protection authorities. In line with the origin based approach all HBP partners are responsible of making certain that the data they submit, including where such collection and storage relies on the scientific research exceptions, conforms to the laws of their EU member state. 55 GDPR Art. 89. 56 In addition to Art 89, the GDPR also reserves the rights of Members states to introduce further conditions, including limitations, on processing of genetic, biometric, or other health related data.   HBP_DPM_20191105 Pu Public 5 Nov 2019 Page 34 71 3.10.1 General application of the GDPR to scientific research Pursuant to GDPR Recital 33 and Article 89, if the purpose of data processing is for scientific research, certain exemptions are available regarding compliance with individual rights. These include the right of access by the data subject, the right to rectification, restriction of processing, and the right to object.57 Additionally, the right to erasure or the right to be forgotten does not apply when it is likely to render impossible or seriously impair the achievement of the scientific objectives of the processing. 58 In addition to exemptions to individual rights, core principles of data protection including the principle of purpose limitation and the principle of storage limitation also contain exceptions for scientific research.59 In short, the allowances for scientific research under the GDPR are substantial. However, for the exclusions to apply, the research must 1 be scientific, 2 meet ethical standards, and 3 apply appropriate safeguards. 1. The GDPR does not define the term scientific research , indicating only that the term should be applied in a broad manner.60 Generally, the research must conform to accepted or standard scientific research requirements including applicable methodological and ethical standards.61 The HBP clearly meets the definition of scientific research . 2. What is meant by ethical standards is also left undefined in the GDPR. Given the substantial focus on ethics in the HBP, the ethical standards requirement is also likely satisfied. A separate opinion on this is issue will be forthcoming. 3. In addition to meeting scientific and ethical standards, data controllers must adopt appropriate safeguards including technical and organisational measures, data minimisation, pseudonymisation, and anonymisation when possible.62 Compliance with these safeguards are necessary for GDPR. Additionally, they are crucial for SPs and the HBP generally to take advantage of exemptions for scientific research. For SP partners intending to rely on the scientific exemptions, they must be able to demonstrate that they meet the above elements in addition to having such an exemption available in their member state. In particular, having a plan for showing how the SP partners minimise and protectthe data of research subjects. 3.10.2 Legal Basis for Scientific Research As noted above, the GDPR broadly requires a legal basis for any processing of personal data.63 For processing to be lawful, the processing party must have legitimate grounds for the duration of the processing. 64 For scientific research, the likely basis will be consent, public interest official authority, or legitimate interest. The legal basis that is used will depend on the member state where data is collected and the policy of the university institution acting as data controller. For example, if an MRI is obtained for the purpose of treatment, that MRI cannot be automatically used for the purpose of research. This is the case even if the research takes place at the same hospital providing treatment. Further, if scientific research was not set as part of the purpose of collecting the data, such further processing or secondary use falls outside of primary purpose and will exceed 57 GDPR Art 89 2 . Reducing compliance obligations for Articles 15, 16, 18, and 21, respectively. 58 GDPR Art 17 3 d . 59 See GDPR Art 5 1 b and GDPR Art 5 1 e respectively. See also GDPR Recital 33 and Article 89. 60 GDPR Recital 159. See WP29 259 Rev. 01 2018 27 28. Expressing concern that scientific research may be applied too broadly and stretched beyond its logical meaning. 61 WP29 259 Rev. 01 2018 28. 62 GDPR Art 89 1 . 63 GDPR Art 6 1 a f . 64 GDPR Art 6.   HBP_DPM_20191105 Pu Public 5 Nov 2019 Page 35 71 the consent provided for treatment. Thus, the further processing research is incompatible with the original purpose and violates the GDPR. However, purpose specification is another area where the GDPR provides flexibility for scientific research. In particular, at Recital 33, the GDPR provides the following It is often not possible to fully identify the purpose of personal data processing for scientific research purposes at the time of data collection. Therefore, data subjects should be allowed to give their consent to certain areas of scientific research when in keeping with recognised ethical standards for scientific research. Data subjects should have the opportunity to give their consent only to certain areas of research or parts of research projects to the extent allowed by the intended purpose.65 Unlike other areas where a specific purpose must be set at the beginning of processing, the flexibility for scientific research is aimed at addressing the problem that researchers do not always know what they are going to find when they start a research project. Therefore, setting a specific purpose, and limiting processing solely to that purpose, would be a significant limiting factor for projects such as the HBP. Recital 33 seems to indicate that broad consent provisions will continue to be valid under the GDPR when ethical standards are in place. If the purposes for data processing within a scientific research project cannot be specified at the outset, GDPR Recital 33 allows as an exception that the purpose may be described at a more general level. However, as noted by the European Data Protection Board EDPB if this exception is applied, it will be subject to a stricter interpretation and requires a high degree of scrutiny. In summary, a best practice is to make the purpose of processing as specific as possible. However, this will not always be possible in HBP research. If the purpose is provided generally at the outset, participants should be provided with updates when processing becomes more specific. Updates could be provided by email or perhaps a dedicated website. 3.11 Consent in Scientific Research In the HBP, consent will serve as the legal basis for the processing of personal data in many instances. The GDPR provides additional obligations for presenting, obtaining, and demonstrating valid consent. The core requirement is that the data subject e.g. study participant, patient, etc. is presented with a specific and genuine choice when consenting to have their data used for research purposes in the HBP. If the consent is uninformed, illusory, or coerced, it will be invalid and the data processing based on that consent will be illegal. However, the GDPR also provides important accommodations derogations for scientific research in the area of consent. Of particular relevance for the HBP, certain aspects of the explicit consent requirement is limited in the case of scientific research. The HBP has a SOP on consent. However, the SOP will likely require further revision to comply with the GDPR. In particular, consent must be much more granular. The disclosure must make it clear to participants how their data will be used in the HBP and that they are submitting to research on a much broader basis than the local hospital or national health system where they obtain treatment. 3.11.1 Consent in research The problem of obtaining and updating informed consent in scientific research is not necessarily novel to the GDPR. The process can be expensive, time consuming and complex, and even lead to participant fatigue or drop out. In order to reduce complexity and cost, many researchers apply 65 GDPR Recital 33. Emphasis added.   HBP_DPM_20191105 Pu Public 5 Nov 2019 Page 36 71 broad consent allowing for a variety of future research projects and objectives without requiring new consent. As defined under the GDPR, consent must be a freely given, specific, and informed indication of the data subject s wishes. This requires that a data subject has a genuine or real choice and control over their decision to consent. For instance, if consent for research is bundled with medical treatment, it is unlikely that the consent will be valid.66 Bundling consent for research to consent for treatment potentially puts pressure or influence on the data subject.67 The GDPR also specifies that where data will be processed for several functions, the granularity requirement mandates that consent be provided from each of those function rather than broadly. Regarding consent for special categories of personal data e.g. the processing of genetic data, biometric data, data concerning health, etc. the GDPR generally prohibits such processing absent explicit consent or another legal basis under Article 9 in addition to a legal basis under GDPR Article 6 . However, the GDPR provides an additional basis i.e. in addition to explicit consent and vital interests for processing special categories of data including scientific research under Article 9 2 j where j processing is necessary for archiving purposes in the public interest, scientific or historical research purposes or statistical purposes in accordance with Article 89 1 based on Union or Member State law which shall be proportionate to the aim pursued, respect the essence of the right to data protection and provide for suitable and specific measures to safeguard the fundamental rights and the interests of the data subject.68 At first blush, this basis appears to be quite extensive and read together with Recital 33 appears to confer wide latitude for researchers. Research articles on the matter point to expansive exceptions to the GDPR.69 However, SP partners should not over read the allowances provided for scientific research and should expect the EDPB to apply a strict interpretation and greater scrutiny where the HBP relies on such exceptions. Further, the EDPB provides that the exceptions are limited and that Recital 33 does not disapply the obligations with regard to the requirement of specific consent. 70 That is, researchers cannot ignore key data protection principles. Even if two of the six principles of data protection are in a sense reduced for scientific research, the other four lawfulness, fairness and transparency, data minimisation, accuracy, and integrity and confidentiality remain fully applicable.71 Further, the new accountability principle will also apply. 72 On that basis, the EDPB provides some points that should be considered by researchers. First, if the purposes of the research cannot be fully specified, the controller is obligated to include additional safeguards. For instance, if only general information is provided when the consent is obtained, this should be updated when more information on the purposes of the research becomes available. As the research advances, additional consent for subsequent steps may also be appropriate. A more general consent also requires that attention be given to all applicable ethical standards as normally applied within the scientific research. In addition to providing updates and following ethical standards, the GDPR requires that the scientific research put in place appropriate safeguards including data 66 WP29 259 2018 , 5. 67 GDPR Art 7 4 . GDPR Recital 43. WP29 259 2018 , 6 7. Evaluating the impact of an imbalance in power. 68 GDPR Art 9 2 j . However, for the exception to be applicable, it must be adopted by a member state as part of the derogations under GDPR Art 89. Determining or defining Safeguards are also left to the member states. Mahsa Shabani Pascal Borry Rules for processing genetic data for research purposes in view of the new EU General Data Protection Regulation 2017 26 European Journal of Human Genetics volume 149, 154. 69 Kärt Pormeister, Genetic data and the research exemption is the GDPR going too far 2017 7 2 International Data Privacy Law 137, 139 140. Available at 70 WP29 259 2018 28. 71 GDPR Art 5 1 a, c, d, and f respectively. 72 GDPR Art 5 2 .   HBP_DPM_20191105 Pu Public 5 Nov 2019 Page 37 71 minimisation, anonymisation, and data security.73 The next section considers practical steps for including this guidance in the HBP. Practical Steps and Impact on the HBP Based on the GDPR and EDPB guidance, consent in scientific research under the GDPR should take account of the following Data subjects must be provided with clear information regarding the identity of the controller, purposes for data processing, and information on sharing of data with third parties. When consent is the legal basis for conducting research, it must be distinguished from other consent requirements that serve as an ethical standard or procedural obligation. For example, if you are basing consent on Clinical Trials Regulation, you should also obtain consent for data protection purposes. Consent must be obtained on an opt in or other active basis. At the time of consent, data subjects must be provided with clear information regarding the identity of the controller, purposes of data processing research, and relevant information on sharing of data with third parties. Consent should be as specific and granular as possible. Make it clear that data submitted to the HBP will be made available to researchers outside of the immediate hospital and the EU more generally. Document consent i.e. demonstrated and verifiable through records . Participants or legal guardians when the data subject cannot provide consent have the right to withdraw consent. 3.11.2 Impact on Broad Consent The GDPR appears to allow the continued use of so called broad consent for scientific research. However, the EDPB subscribes to the view that access to such consent should be updated on continual basis. In the HBP, we should consider ways of providing updates to consent and other means to provide participants with results and progress of research. To avoid participant fatigue, SP partners should consider developing a tiered approach. For example, one track would require rolling or new consent for each stage of the research. A second track would allow the data subject to consent to not obtaining further consent requests. 3.11.3 Withdrawal of consent In providing specific conditions and means for evaluating consent, the GDPR states that i t shall be as easy to withdraw as to give consent. 74 Even in the case of scientific research, data subjects have the right to withdraw their consent.75 The GDPR does not provide an exemption to this requirement for scientific research.76 Therefore, if HBP controllers obtain a request to withdraw consent, they must generally act on this request and delete the personal data. This will require that HBP Platforms build in or include this functionality. 73 GDPR Art 89 1 . 74 GDPR Art 7 3 . 75 ibid. 76 WP29 259 Rev. 01 2018 28 29.   HBP_DPM_20191105 Pu Public 5 Nov 2019 Page 38 71 Non data protection consent requirements Data collected from human beings must have been collected according to the ethical principles governing research in the EU. Where the data were collected as part of the HBP work, compliance with the ethical principles will have been checked during the Ethics Review. Further, data from humans that was collected outside the HBP has to comply with the same standards. Evidence must be provided that 1. The data subject consented to the procedure undertaken to collect the data, 2. The data subject consented to the use of the data for the research purposes that it is to be used for, and 3. Where no consent for data sharing is available, the re use of the data must be legal according to EU data protection legislation. These principles apply to both experimental data collected from volunteers and to medical and patient data. The ethics approval to collect human data will normally be provided by a competent authority such as a national or regional research ethics committee. The research underlying the data must either have been conducted in a European country and have received such approval or it has to comply with the principles and be in a position to receive approval, if it were to be undertaken in a European country. In countries where special authorisations are required, it is assumed that this has been collected, prior to the onset of data sharing e.g. special authorisation from la commission nationale informatique et libertés CNIL in France . In order to help PIs, the HBP has developed a Standard Operating Procedure on Informed Consent. This SOP contains the minimum standards that need to be met for research to count as acceptable. Local research ethics committees or other relevant authorities may require stricter standards in line with local regulations. The informed consent SOP should provide Data Custodians of data collected outside of the EU with an indication of whether their ethics processes are equivalent to European standards. Data that do not fulfil these criteria should not be registered or used in the HBP digital research infrastructure. The data protection officer is working on an updated opinion on consent under the GDRP. A link we be added when the opinion is finalised. 3.12 Relevant Scientific Research SR Derogations by Member State For the HBP as a whole, the derogations are generally positive and enhance the ability to conduct scientific research, when applicable. However, they also present a significant challenge to creating one policy that can be adopted across the project. The chart below gives an overview of the status of Scientific Research SR derogations and GDPR across the EU based on research from Bird Birda leading   HBP_DPM_20191105 Pu Public 5 Nov 2019 Page 39 71 international law firm.77 This evaluation is ongoing and derogations by member states are still under determination in some countries. Therefore, SPs should contact local DPOs to confirm SR derogations and requirements under national law. The chart that follows is for informational status purposes only, and cannot be taken as legal advice, authorisation, or general HBP policy. Country GDRP Adopted Finalised Relevant Scientific Research SR Derogation Austria Yes All other data processing activities for scientific, historical or statistical purposes require i a specific statutory authorisation, ii the consent of the data subject or iii approval by the Austrian Data Protection Authority. Since these provisions are quite restrictive, special regulations for certain areas especially health care and pharma sector are currently in legislation process. Belgium No. In consultation N A Czech Republic No. In consultation N A Denmark Yes 10 permits processing of special category data and data related to criminal offences for statistical or scientific purposes when necessary for reasons of substantial public interest and if necessary for the research 11 3 permits processing of personal identification numbers by private organisations for statistical or scientific purposes 22 5 restricts data subjects rights in relation to statistical or scientific purposes. Finland No. In consultation Proposed Data Protection Act includes derogations and safeguards in accordance with Article 89 GDPR. Processing for scientific, historical or statistical purposes is permissible as long as the safeguards in Article 89 GDPR and the proposed Data Protection Act are met. France No. In consultation after constitutional appeal Unclear on SR. The New Data Protection Act adds a provision on the data subjects rights in case of processing for archiving purposes. The right of access, the right to rectification, the right to restriction of processing, the right to data portability and the right to object do not apply for this type of processing. Germany Yes 27 FDPA permits processing of sensitive data without consent for scientific or historical research and for statistical purposes if the processing is necessary for these purposes and the data controller s interest to process data significantly outweighs the data subject s interest. The data controller must apply certain suitable and specific measures. Provision also restricts data subjects rights in the context of processing for research and statistical purposes, and sets out requirements for the publication of such data. 77 Based primarily on the international law firm Two Birds GDPR Tracker available here   HBP_DPM_20191105 Pu Public 5 Nov 2019 Page 40 71 32 37 FDPA also contain other general restrictions of data subjects rights on the basis of Art. 23 GDPR. Hungary No. In consultation N A Ireland Yes. Under section 42 of the Act, personal data may be processed for a archiving purposes in the public interest b scientific or historical research purposes or c statistical purposes, subject to suitable and specific measures being taken to safeguard the fundamental rights and freedoms of data subjects. Italy Amended current act to comply with GDPR Amended Section 99 IDPA, allows personal data to be processed stored transferred to another controller after the normal period for processing of personal data and even after the termination of the main data processing if these processing will be carried out for scientific, historical or statistical purposes as well as at archiving in the public interest. Amended Section 106 IDPA the Italian DPA is to promote rules for professional and ethical conduct for processing for statistical purposes or for scientific research. Rules to apply both to public and private bodies, scientific societies and professional associations. Aim of the guidance is to identify adequate guarantees for the rights and freedoms of the data subject in accordance with Article 89 GDPR. Amended Section 110 IDPA possible to carry out scientific and medical research, using special categories of data, without consent in certain circumstances. Amended Section 110 bis IDPA ability for the Italian DPA to authorise secondary uses of special category data for scientific and statistical research, in situations where it is impossible or would involve a disproportionate effort to inform all data subjects. Does not apply to genetic data. Netherlands Yes Article 42 GDPR Execution Act provides that where processing takes place solely for scientific or historical research purposes, or statistical purposes, the controller may declare articles 15, 16 and 18 of the GDPR inapplicable. Data subjects will not have rights of access, rectification or restriction of processing for these data. Norway Yes Special categories of personal information may be processed without additional consent e.g. broad consent . This applies to the following purposes Archival purposes in the public interest Purpose related to scientific or historical research Statistical purposes The exception requires an analysis balancing of the public policy interests and the fundamental rights of the individual. Medical professionals researchers must seek guidance from a DPO or other professional to conduct a risk data protection assessment. Poland Yes. SR and other derogations ongoing. N A Spain No. In consultation Article 25 processing of personal data for statistical purposes a will only be lawful only if the information is required by an EU rule or by the statistical programming rules b Spanish Government Statistics Act processing of special category data for statistical purposes must be based on express and voluntary consent of the data subject   HBP_DPM_20191105 Pu Public 5 Nov 2019 Page 41 71 c If statistical secrecy guarantees under Spanish legislation apply, competent bodies for the public statistical function can deny data subject rights in Articles 15 to 22 of the GDPR . Article 26 processing of personal data for archiving purposes in the public interest is subject to the Spanish Historical Heritage Act and other related regulations. Draft Bill does not provide information about the processing for scientific or historical research purposes. Sweden Yes N A Switzerland N A N A UK Yes Sched.1, part 1, 4 Processing of special category data and criminal offence data for archiving purposes, scientific or historical research purposes, or statistical purposes permitted if in accordance with GDPR Art.81 use of t.o.m.s and data minimisation anonymise if possible pseudonymise if possible and must not be likely to cause damage or distress must not be used for measures or decisions with respect to a particular data subject unless is approved medical research s.19 and is in the public interest. Exemptions from data subject rights access rectification restriction portability right to object where processing meets conditions set out in Art.89 1 s.19 DP Act and compliance would prejudice the ability to achieve the purposes of the research statistics archiving and for research statistics the results must not be made available in identifiable form. The HBP DPO plans to contact local DPOs to update and finalise the above table. SPs should consult with their local DPOs and national experts to determine adoption in their member states. 3.13 Data protection by design and default Data protection by design and data protection by default require that data controllers design and implement systems that safeguard the rights of data subjects.78 For the HBP, this means integrating data protection requirements, including the principles, into all aspects of ICT use and development from training and design to maintenance. The GDPR does not prescribe a specific formula or method for meeting data protection by design and data protection by default requirements. Like other areas of the GDPR, it requires applying a risk based approach and will depend to some extent on the processing taking place. As a starting point, SP partners designing any system should determine whether that system will process personal data or whether data may become personal as a result of the processing re identification . If the answer is yes, a DPO or data protection expert should be added as a stakeholder to the project. Furthermore, at the earliest phases, developers should consider how they might incorporate data protection by design elements evaluated in the next section in addition to taking account of the data protection principles. 78 GDPR Article 25 and Recital 78.   HBP_DPM_20191105 Pu Public 5 Nov 2019 Page 42 71 All HBP SP partners are required to design, develop, and operate their services employing privacy by design and privacy by default principles. Below are key starting points Pseudonymisation Pseudonymising personal data as soon as possible. By applying pseudonymisation, encryption, and aggregation of personal data, the risk of loss or misuse is significantly reduced. SPs should apply these techniques whenever possible. Data minimisation Reduce the amount of personal data collected and processed to what is 1 lawful and 2 strictly necessary. Do not collect unnecessary or excessive information for the purpose. Delete data when storage is no longer required for the purposes. For example, if personal data such as email addresses have been collected for an HBP event, they should be deleted after the event if they are no longer needed and the purpose for which they were collected attendance has been completed. If you do not need GPS location data to complete the purpose, do not collected it. Purpose limitation Design organisational or technical means that allow users to set a purpose for the data collection. Organisational measures Adopt internal policies aimed at data protection by design. In addition to the DPM at a project level, SPs should consider the internal steps they might take to improve data protection in their practices. For example, adding data protection to their risk assessment. Create clear requirements for documentation. Technical measures Use encryption, access control, and other measures to limit the risks to data subjects. For example, avoid linkability between different data sets. Create procedures to split database tables, distinguish between components, and create different access requirements for areas with sensitive personal data. Take steps to limit the creation of a complete profile of a data subject. Deletion destruction Once the purpose of data collection has been completed, design processes for deletion. Further, follow best practices on data deletion and destruction. Transparency Make it clear for data subjects what data are being processed, who is processing the data, why it is being processed, how, and how long will he data be kept. Does the information we provide given potential data subjects enough information about what we do and how we will use their data This information could be contained on a website, as part of a privacy policy, in an informed consent form, etc. Data protection by default Configure all settings to the most privacy friendly ones. 3.14 Individual Rights HBP partners must support compliance with certain individual rights. This is an area where EU member states have some ability to derogate or deviate from the GDPR scientific research. Derogations are noted herein.   HBP_DPM_20191105 Pu Public 5 Nov 2019 Page 43 71 3.14.1 The right to be informed79 A key transparency requirement in the GDPR is the individual s right to be informed regarding data collection and use. HBP controllers must be able to provide 1. Purposes for processing personal data, 2. Retention periods for that personal data, 3. Information on the parties the data will be shared with e.g. processors . This information must be available to data subjects when data are collected. If a data subject requests the above information, it must be provided within a reasonable period. The UK DPA sets this period at one month. Furthermore, the information should be provided in a concise, transparent, intelligible, easily accessible manner using clear and plain language. As provided above in the section on documentation, this will require keeping complete and updated records. The EDPB has adopted detailed guidelines on transparency available here. The right to be informed in the HBP A good starting point for meeting this requirement is with the privacy policy provided at the time of data collection. SP controllersshould include the following information in their privacy policy website informed consent Name and contact details of the HBP SP CDP partner or other data controller A link to PORE and the HBP DPO contact page The purpose of processing The lawful basis of the processing Legitimate interests for the processing if used as a lawful basis Right to withdraw consent if used as a lawful basis The categories of personal data obtained Information on transfers of the personal data to any third countries Retention periods Rights available Source of personal data if applicable and Information on automated decision making or profiling where applicable . In providing the above information, HBP controllers should make their privacy disclosures easy to understand and as concise as possible. In addition to using plain language, consider using dashboard notices, icons, or even drawings if appropriate. See UK ico Privacy Policy above. 79 GDPR Articles 13 and 14. See Further GDPR Art 12 and EDPB, Guidelines on transparency under Regulation 2016 679 29 November 2017 .   HBP_DPM_20191105 Pu Public 5 Nov 2019 Page 44 71 3.14.2 The right of access80 The right of access gives data subjects the rights to obtain certain information including Confirmation that the HBP SP CDP partners are processing their personal data. A copy of the data subjects personal data from an HBP controller generally within one month of the request in a commonly used electronic format. In almost all cases, the information should be provided without charging a fee. If you intend to charge the data subject for obtaining their personal data, contact your local DPO or the HBP DPO for guidance. In addition to providing a copy of personal data, SP partners should also be prepared to provide the information regarding the purpose of processing, personal data collected, retention periods, etc. . If this information has already been provided in a privacy notice, a link to that notice or policy can be provided along with a copy of the record. The GDPR does not provide a format or procedural requirements for the request. The HBP policy is therefore to accept any mode of communication including requests made by email, letter, the PORE or the DPO request page. To the extent possible, a record or log of the request and its resolution must be kept. For help in providing the required information, all SPs and CDPs should contact the HBP DPO. Scientific Allowance EU member states have the option of adopting an exception to the right of access for scientific research when the requirements of Art. 89 1 see Scientific Research Section have been met. 3.14.3 The right to rectification81 The right to rectification gives data subjects the right to correct inaccurate personal data. Generally, this includes data that is incorrect or misleading. The greater the impact of the inaccuracy on the data subject, the higher the burden on the controller to correct such information. For example, information that a patient has a medical condition should be corrected if the condition is successfully treated. This right is closely tied to the accuracy principle .82 SP partners must have processes to correct personal information. If it is difficult or impossible to correct information, the SP partners should also have a means for deletion. The right to rectification in the HBP SP partners must have a processes to correct personal information. If it is difficult or impossible to correct information, the SP partners should also have a means for deletion. Scientific Allowance EU member states have the option of adopting an exception to right to rectification for scientific research when the requirements of Art. 89 1 see Scientific Research Section have been met. 80 See GDPR Art 15. See further Recitals 63, 64. 81 GDPR Art 16. 82 See further GDPR Articles 5, 12, 16 19.   HBP_DPM_20191105 Pu Public 5 Nov 2019 Page 45 71 3.14.4 The right to erasure right to be forgotten 83 The right to erasure also known as the right to be forgotten provides data subjects with the right to have their data erased. Once a request to erase data has been received, the data can no longer be used for any purpose. The right to erasure in the HBP Data should generally be deleted when The purpose for which the data was collected has been completed Consent has been withdrawn The legitimate interest relied on is no longer adequate to justify processing or Data were processed unlawfully. Therefore, HBP SP controllers must have processes in place to meet such requests. As a starting point, HBP controllers should Have a process in place to respond to such requests If data have been shared, have a processes to contact controllers joint controllers or processors for deletion and Have appropriate methods to delete or erase data including from backup systems i.e. rewrite over time . Scientific Allowance EU member states have the option of adopting an exception to right to erasure for scientific research when applying the right is likely to render impossible or seriously impair the achievement of the objectives of that processing See GDPR Article 17 3 d and the Scientific Research section for further details. 3.14.5 The right to restrict processing84 Data subjects have the right to request that their data be restricted in some circumstances. The right is essentially an alternative to requesting that personal data be deleted. Data controllers retain the right to store such data, but not to process the data. In essence, the data are taken out of circulation. Circumstances in the HBP might include A patient contests the accuracy of their personal data. A controller no longer needs the data, but is requires a record of the data to defend a legal claim. An individual has objected to the use of personal data, and the SP is attempting to determine whether they have legitimate grounds to continue processing the data. The right to restrict processing in the HBP SP partners must implement technical and organisational measures to comply with requests to restrict processing. These could include temporarily moving the data to another processing system, making the data unavailable to users. In the case of the MIP or the NIP, when possible, temporarily removing data from the Platforms. 83 GDPR Art 17 Recital 66. 84 GDPR Art 18 and Recital 67.   HBP_DPM_20191105 Pu Public 5 Nov 2019 Page 46 71 Like the other individual rights, the request can be made verbally or in writing. SPs should respond to requests within one month. A request to restrict processing can be refused where it is manifestly unfounded or excessive. Similarly, SP partners can charge a reasonable fee in some circumstances. However, any refusal or fee will require justification. Scientific Allowance EU member states have the option of adopting an exception to right to restrict processing for scientific research when the requirements of Art. 89 1 see Scientific Research Section have been met. 3.14.6 The right to data portability85 The right to data portability gives data subjects the right to request a copy of their personal data they have provided to a controller in a format they can move or take with them to another service. This may include easily identified information such as email address or contact details. It may also include traffic or location data, data processed using connected objects such as wearable devices. The purpose of the provision is to allow users to move from one IT environment to another. Data should be transmitted securely in a commonly used machine readable format. Only controllers are required to provide the data. The right is further limited to data processed on either the legal basis of consent or performance of a contract and only includes personal data as defined above. 3.14.7 The right to object86 Data subjects may object to personal data processing in a variety of circumstances. The breadth of the right will to some extent depend on the purposes of the data processing. For example, in the case of direct marketing profiling the right to object is effectively absolute. However, in other cases, the objection must be balanced against other rights in other situations. When data are processed for the purpose of scientific research, the right to object and stop processing is limited. The GDPR provides that the right to object is available, unless the processing is necessary for the performance of a task carried out for reasons of public interest. 87 The right to object in the HBP In the HBP, data collected and processed for research purposes will outweigh an objection when it is necessary to carry out the task. However, SPs should take care not to over apply this exception. For example, even if most of the personal data subject to the request is part of the scientific purpose, when the data are also used for other purposes outside of scientific research, the right will still apply. Scientific Allowance EU member states have the option of adopting an exception to right to object for scientific research when the requirements of Art. 89 1 see Scientific Research Section have been met. See also GDPR Article 21 6 . 85 GDPR Art 20. See also EDPB, The right to data portability Guidelines on the right to data portability under Regulation 2016 679, WP242 rev.01 86 GDPR Art 21. See also GDPR Articles 6, 12, 89 and recitals 69 and 70. 87 GDPR Art 21 6 .   HBP_DPM_20191105 Pu Public 5 Nov 2019 Page 47 71 3.14.8 Rights in relation to automated decision making and profiling88 Automated individual decision making is a decision made by automated means without any human involvement. This includes making decisions such as whether or not to provide a loan, and making recruitment or employment decisions. The GDPR restricts solely automated decisions, including those based on profiling, that have a legal or similarly significant effect on individuals. In the HBP, several SPs use machine learning and big data. However, based on the Ethics Rapporteur one pagers, it does not currently appear that any SPs are using algorithms to make automated decisions in the manner prohibited under the GDPR. 3.15 Data Protection Officer89 The General Data Protection Regulation GDPR requires the designation of a Data Protection Officer DPO in some circumstances. Given the scope and categories of personal data processed in the HBP, the project has appointed a DPO. The DPO works with HBP partners within SPs and CDPs to facilitate compliance with the GDPR. The DPO is a professional in the field of data protection and assists with monitoring of internal compliance and data protection obligations across the HBP in addition to acting as a contact point for data subjects and the supervisory authorities. Additionally, the DPO focuses on increasing accountability to data subjects across the HBP. The role of DPO includes consultation on data processing activities and providing advice and recommendations on compliance with applicable laws. In particular, the DPO assists in carrying out data protection impact assessments DPIA , among other compliance tasks. In addition to data protection compliance, the DPO has a communication function and consults with data subjects, HBP partners and leadership, and supervisory authorities. The DPO has created a confidential contact point as shown below and available here. 88 GDPR Articles 21 and 22. See also WP29, Guidelines on Automated individual decision making and Profiling for the purposes of Regulation 2016 679 wp251rev.01 . Endorsed by the EDPB. 89 GDPR Articles 37 39. See also WP29, Guidelines on Data Protection Officers DPOs WP 243 rev.01 . Endorsed by the EDPB.   HBP_DPM_20191105 Pu Public 5 Nov 2019 Page 48 71 DPO Contact The DPO has created a confidential contact point here. The DPO is also available via email kevin.mcgillivray jus.uio.no or as provided on the HBP webpage.   HBP_DPM_20191105 Pu Public 5 Nov 2019 Page 49 71 3.16 Documentation Requirements The GDPR explicitly requires that the HBP SPs CDPs data controllers document data processing activities.90 In addition to providing practical information such as the contact details of the parties responsible for data processing, the HBP partners must maintain records of the purposes of processing, a description of data types, information on data sharing and data transfers, data retention schedules, data security and organisational measures, among others. To meet this requirement, the DPO and the DGWG undertook a data mapping survey designed to collect the information necessary to comply with GDPR requirements. This survey has also been used to provide a more granular and complete map of the personal data processed in HBP.91 The second objective is to review our policies and procedures for compliance with the GDPR more generally. In particular, this requires a better understanding of our data flow including the location of personal data, an assessment of existing contracts and privacy policies, Privacy Impact Assessments PIAs , and Data Protection Impact Assessments DPIAs , where available. An excel sheet shown below has been created for each SP to record and manage documentation requirements. SP partners are responsible for keeping the record accurate within their institutions. They are also required to provide the DPO and Ethics Support WP12.4 with updates. In addition to ensuring compliance with an audit, having a clear overview and complete records is necessary for data breach reporting, in addition to complying with other aspects of the GDPR such as the rights of individuals to request erasure or data portability. Documentation in the HBP All SP partners are required to keep documentation of their data processing activities. SP partners must also update the HBP DPO on data processing within the project. 3.17 Data Breach92 Pursuant to the GDPR, a data breach includes a breach of security leading to the accidental or unlawful destruction, loss, alteration, unauthorised disclosure of, or access to, personal data transmitted, stored or otherwise processed. 93 The GDPR requires all organisations to report certain data breaches to the relevant supervisory authority. This must generally occur within 72 hours. 90 GDPR Art 30. 91 This will also contribute to other GDPR requirements including accountability. GDPR Art 5 2 . 92 GDPR Articles 33 34. Recitals 75, 85 88. WP29 guidelines on personal data breach endorsed by the EDPB available here 93 GDPR Art4 12 . Name Name Name Address Address Address Email Email Email Telephone Telephone Telephone Name and contact details Data Protection Officer if applicable Representative if applicable Controller SP Purpose of processing Name and contact details of joint controller if applicable Categories of individuals Categories of personal data Categories of recipients Link to contract with processor   HBP_DPM_20191105 Pu Public 5 Nov 2019 Page 50 71 Therefore, SP partners must have reporting practices in place. HBP partner stakeholders will generally include a local data protection officer DPO and computer emergency response team CERT . The following Figure provides an overview of the GDPR data breach requirements. The SP partners must also inform the HBP DPO of any data breach. In addition to having a means of reporting, the SP partners must also have robust breach detection capabilities and the ability to recognise a data breach. In some cases, SP partners will have to inform data subjects of the breach. Examples of potential data breaches in the HBP Unauthorised access to an HBP Platform. Sending personal data to an incorrect recipient. This might be done with an email or sharing a link to a document. A lost or stolen laptop containing personal data. If properly encrypted, the SP partners may escape reporting the data subject, but must report the loss to their local DPO CERT and the HBP DPO. A loss of availability, confidentiality, or integrity of personal data. For example, if an SP partner is subject to a ransomware attack and no longer has access to data. Data Breach in the HBP Where a data breach has been identified or is suspected by any user of HBP systems involving or suspected to involve data produced or owned by the HBP through its partners, this should be notified by submitting it to the Point of Registration system PORE . A submission should include at least the following information Name of the reporting individual and means of contacting them email Description of breach   HBP_DPM_20191105 Pu Public 5 Nov 2019 Page 51 71 Cause of the data breach Dataset affected Description of how it was identified Upon submission to the PORE, the data breach will be brought to the attention of the Ethics Manager and Ethics Support team. An immediate notification will be sent to the DIR. Where required, further investigations will be undertaken to clarify the exact nature of the breach and its consequences. Ethics Support and the DIR will identify the relevant supervisory authority and report the breach to this authority if required. A data breach may require an internal audit. The Data Governance Working Group DGWG is currently working on procedures for internal audit. The DPM will be updated when such procedures are finalised. 3.18 Data Protection Impact Assessment DPIA A Data Protection Impact Assessment DPIA is a tool for building and demonstrating compliance with the GDPR. DPIAs employ a systematic process for assessing the impacts of the processing of personal data and the effect that processing has on the fundamental right to privacy of the data subject. The controller has the primary responsibility for performing the DPIA. A DPIA should take place prior to the processing of personal data. The EDPD makes it very clear that the DPIA should take place early, often, and continuously. There is no set formula for carrying out a DPIA. The French DPA, CNIL, has provided helpful guidance on the matter. According to the CNIL, the compliance approach requires 1 compliance with fundamental rights and principles, and 2 management of the data security risks. Compliance with the GDPR requires meeting both of these aspects as demonstrated in the following CNIL graphic. The DPIA process should be continuously reviewed and regularly re assessed. In other words, this is not a one off exercise. This is particularly necessary when creating new technologies and infrastructures such as the MIP or the NIP, but does not exclude processing in other HBP SPs. In some cases, a DPIA is voluntary while in others it is mandatory. Data processing operations in the HBP more generally have the potential to result in a high risk to the rights and freedoms of natural persons. As a result, HBP partners are obligated to perform DPIAs in several areas. In particular, HBP Platforms, and more generally the scope and subject matter of research in the SPs, contain special categories of personal data including personal medical records.   HBP_DPM_20191105 Pu Public 5 Nov 2019 Page 52 71 3.18.1 Carrying out a DPIA Methodology As a point of departure, DPIA requirements are flexible and intended to be scalable to the processing operation. That is, SPs will have some flexibility in determining methodologies, structure, and the form of the assessment. However, the DPIA must be a genuine assessment of risks which can then be addressed by the controller. Moreover, given the scope of the project, scale of processing activities, and overall level of financing and sophistication, the HBP partners can expect to be held to a high standard in its DPIA analysis. The CNIL has created a method supported by open source software tools for conducting DPIAs. The CNIL guidance incorporates the requirements of the GDPR and the WP29 Opinion on DPIAs. The CNIL method can be combined with other methods including the recently released ISO DPIA method and the method provided by the UK. Although SP partners may apply another method, the HBP DPO recommends applying the CNIL DPIA. The graphic below shows the CNIL method as applied to the MIP. 1. Context This step requires defining the context of the data processing operation. This includes an assessment of the nature, scope, and purpose of the processing operation. SPs must also be able to identify data controllers and data processors, and evaluate their roles and responsibilities in processing operations. Further, SPs should be able to describe in detail the data collected, recipients and storage durations, and provide description of the processes from collection to erasure. 2. Fundamental Principles This step requires analysis of compliance with the fundamental privacy principles set out in the GDPR. The assessment of the risks to the rights and freedoms of data subjects requires identifying controls selected to comply with informational and other the rights of the data subject such as data portability, rectification, erasure, restricted processing, among others. Further, controls to meet consent requirements, international transfers of data, data processing agreement requirements. 3. Risks and data security The DPIA must also evaluate risks to the data subjects and the measures envisaged to address the risks. In other words, can the SP effectively treat risks to personal data These include safeguards and security measures designed to protect personal data and having in place adequate controls such as access control, anonymisation, among others. Additionally, the HBP partners must have tools in place to demonstrate compliance. 4. Validation of the DPIA Following the assessment of the points above, HBP partners must make a determination of whether the controls in place are sufficient to protect the data subjects. If not, the HBP partners must determine what improvements can be made or   HBP_DPM_20191105 Pu Public 5 Nov 2019 Page 53 71 controls that might be added. In addition, the HBP partners will need to determine if it is necessary to consult with data protection authorities evaluated below . Taking the example of the MIP, the principles described above are displayed in the CNIL software as follows. Based on the outcome of the DPIA, including the seriousness of the risks and the likelihood of occurrence, a decision must be made on the processing activity.   HBP_DPM_20191105 Pu Public 5 Nov 2019 Page 54 71 In the example above, the DPIA determined that the risk seriousness is negligible, and that the risk likelihood is negligible. 4. Data Anonymisation As provided above, the GDPR only applies to personal data or information concerning an identified or identifiable natural person. If data are anonymised, it is no longer considered to be personal and is thus outside the scope of GDPR application. In other words, if data in an SP are anonymous, the GDPR does not apply and the data can be processed for research purposes without the restrictions of data protection law. However, given the difficulty in creating truly anonymous data, the bar for anonymisation has been set extremely high under EU data protection law. To determine whether a person is identifiable, SP partners must consider all the means reasonably likely to be used, such as singling out, either by the controller or by another person, to identify the natural person directly or indirectly. To make this determination, SP partners must consider all objective factors, such as the costs of and the amount of time required for identification, taking into consideration the available technology at the time of the processing and technological developments. In making this determination, SP partners must consider the robustness of the anonymisation techniques they apply and the potential for failure of those techniques.   HBP_DPM_20191105 Pu Public 5 Nov 2019 Page 55 71 The main anonymisation techniques applied in data protection law are randomisation and generalisation. Regardless of the technique applied e.g. addition, permutation, differential privacy, aggregation, k anonymity, l diversity, t closeness, etc. , three main questions should be considered 1. Is it still possible to single out an individual 2. Is it still possible to link records relating to an individual 3. Can information be inferred concerning an individual The table below shows the strengths and weaknesses of some of most common anonymisation techniques. The optimal solution should be decided on a case by case basis, possibly by using a combination of different techniques. Is Singling out still a risk Is Linkability still a risk Is Inference still a risk Pseudonymisation Yes Yes Yes Noise addition Yes May not May not Substitution Yes Yes May not Aggregation or K anonymity No Yes Yes L diversity No Yes May not Differential privacy May not May not May not Hashing Tokenisation Yes Yes May not Strengths and weaknesses of different anonymisation techniques WP216 Although there is no prescriptive standard for in the EU, in one of the few areas of guidance, the Working Party 29 states that anonymisation requires irreversibility preventing identification of the data subject taking into account all the means reasonably likely to be used for identification. Although this zero risk approach has also been criticised, it is the position taken by regulators. Anonymisation and Pseudonymisation in the HBP Pseudonymisation In some areas of the HBP, there has been confusion regarding the differences between pseudonymised data an anonymised data. Pseudonymisation is not a method of anonymisation. It merely reduces the linkability of a dataset with the original identity of a data subject. Because the data subject is still identifiable with the use, inclusion, or cross referencing of additional information, the data subject is considered identifiable and the GDPR remains applicable. If HBP human data require re identification at some point, the data are not anonymised for purposes of the GDPR. The GDPR will remain applicable. Personal data that have been pseudonymised data, including encrypted data, are provided with certain advantages under the GDPR such as data breach reporting. Whenever possible, personal data in HBP data should be pseudonymised. However, the GDPR still applies to pseudonymised data because the data can be attributed to a natural person by the use of additional information such as a decryption key. Anonymisation The optimal solution used by an SP for anonymisation must be decided on a case by case basis, possibly by using a combination of different techniques described above. Generally, these will include 1. Randomisation Remove strong link between the data and the individual. Common techniques include permutation and Differential Privacy. 2. Generalisation Aggregating or generalising data l diversity, t closeness, etc. . SPs must account for the following risks Singling out isolate some or all records which identify an individual in the dataset Linkability ability to link, at least, two records concerning the same data subject or a group of data subjects   HBP_DPM_20191105 Pu Public 5 Nov 2019 Page 56 71 Inference the possibility to deduce, with significant probability, the value of an attribute from the values of a set of other attributes SPs that rely upon anonymisation must evaluate its robustness. Advancements in technology, such as big data and associated analytical techniques, complicate this assessment.94 The reality is that data that are truly anonymous in 2018 may be identifiable in 2028 given the likelihood of increased computing power and or the ability to combine multiple datasets. Additionally, if data is provided to a third party in an anonymous format, and the third party combines the data or processes it in a way that allows for identification, then EU data protection law will again apply because the data will no longer be anonymous.95 In other words, the status of anonymous data is not static. This should be done as part of the DPIA or other review. HBP Medical Informatics Platform MIP Example MIP Local Data stored on the MIP local will be pseudonoymised using strong encryption and hashing, among other techniques. Data stored on the MIP local pseudonymised data are attributable to a natural person by the use of additional information, which is securely stored using both organisational and technical security measures. MIP Federated Data at the MIP federated level will be anonymised. The MIP federated applies both randomisation and generalisation techniques. MIP federated users cannot single out data subjects by identifying a patient within the MIP data set. Because of the generalisation aggregation safeguards applied, it is not possible for users to isolate a link to the records to a single data subject or group of data subjects. Queries and available results are closely controlled. Therefore, it is not possible to infer or deduce values that might be used to identify a specific data subject. The following points are examples taken from the MIP de identification strategy. Further explanation is also available in D8.6.1 D48.1 D14 SP8 Medical Informatics Platform Architecture and Deployment Plan on pages 22 27, available here.96 Points in the strategy include Information that is not needed for research purposes is removed Identifiers are pseudonymised replaced with a generated pseudo identifier hash The link between the original identifier and the pseudo identifier is stored separately from the information in dedicated database All other identifiers present in the original data visit id, etc. will also be pseudonymised The birth dates will be reduced to the year All other dates will be reduced to the month this level of detail is required for longitudinal studies Patient names, addresses and similar personal information should not appear in data provided for the Platform and if they do, they are removed at the de identification level Specific de identification rules can be defined for other fields based on the MIP or the partner s requirements 94 WP29 216 2014 9. 95 WP29 216 2014 10. 96 0dd6aa5ca7f0 d861_d481_d48_sga1_m6_accepted_180709.pdf   HBP_DPM_20191105 Pu Public 5 Nov 2019 Page 57 71 A unique and well defined pattern for dates is followed, such as dd mm yyyy any pattern is acceptable . Date field must not contain anything else no text, annotations, incomplete dates, etc. Only one type of data per column either numerical, date, text, etc. 5. International data Transfers Although EU legislators acknowledge that transferring data to third countries is often necessary, such transfers also have the potential to undermine the protections afforded to European citizens.97 To address this balance, the GDPR restricts the transfers or exports of personal data outside of the EEA to third countries that do not ensure an an adequate level of protection .98 Although left undefined in the GDPR, transfers generally concentrate on the physical location of infrastructure and any movement to or from those points. In some cases, data are transferred to third countries as part of research activities. In others, such transfers are inadvertent. For example, HBP partners using cloud storage will often transfer data to the US. The GDPR does not radically change the status quo of the Directive regarding data transfers.99 If an SP partner was compliant with the Directive, their means of transfer is also likely compliant with the GDPR. General rules regarding international data transfersare as follows 1. Data transfers within the EU EEA are deemed to have an adequate level of protection and are permitted without limitation.100 2. Data may also be transferred to non EU countries with an adequate level of protection without limitation.101 3. Data may also be transferred if adequate safeguards are in place e.g. Standard Contractual Clauses . 4. Data may also be transferred using a derogation from the main rule in some limited circumstances e.g. consent . Absent adequacy in 1 and 2 or the exceptions listed in 2 3 4 , the GDPR prohibits data transfers to third countries. Adequate safeguards are evaluated further below. 5.1 Privacy Shield The US does not offer an adequate level of data protection. As a result, personal data in SPs cannot flow freely from the EU to the US. Until 2015, the EC accommodated transatlantic data transfers through the Safe Harbour Framework. However, the Safe Harbour Framework met its end in the landmark case of Maximillian Schrems v Data Protection Commissioner. Following the decision in Schrems, the EU and US developed the Privacy Shield Framework. SP partners can use the privacy shield framework to transfer data to the EU. A registry of participating certified companies is available here.102 97 GDPR Art 44. Expanded further in Recital 101. 98 GDPR Art 45 1 and Recital 103. 99 However, it will ease notification authorisation requirements currently required by DPAs in some EU member states. See GDPR 45 1 . 100 GDPR Art 1 3 . 101 The EC recognises Andorra, Argentina, Canada limited to commercial organisations , Faroe Islands, Guernsey, Israel, Isle of Man, Jersey, New Zealand, Switzerland, Uruguay and the US limited to the Privacy Shield framework , available at outside eu adequacy protection personal data non eu countries_en. 102   HBP_DPM_20191105 Pu Public 5 Nov 2019 Page 58 71 5.2 Appropriate safeguards Even if the third country does not provide an adequate level of protection, transfers of personal data are still possible. However, the SP making the transfer will have to apply appropriate safeguards to guarantee that the fundamental rights of data subjects are protected.103 These generally include binding corporate rules BCRs , ad hoc, or standard contractual clauses SCCs as adopted by the EC.104 The GDPR also provides the possibility for international transfers based on codes of conduct and other certification schemes. However, no certification schemes or codes of conduct for international transfers have been approved. 5.2.1 Standard contractual clauses If a third country does not offer an adequate level of protection, data transfers can be accomplished using contracts. 105 That is, the parties to the transfer can contractually commit to provide an adequate level of protection. Although contracts can be tailored and adopted on an ad hoc basis for individual approval, SCCs Standard Contractual Clauses drafted by the EC are also available. The EC s SCCs are a popular tool for international data transfers to third countries.106 The EC has adopted three sets of SCCs two focus on controller to controller transfers and the third focuses on controller to processor transfers. The SCCs drafted by the EC essentially function as standards. For instance, altering or partially adopting SCCs invalidates the adequacy protection they provide.107 Although SCCs can be combined or presented as part of a larger contract, the SCC terms cannot be altered. As a result, SCCs provide little flexibility. SP partners relying on SCCs should adopt unmodified standard terms when possible. For SP partners that have SCCs adopted under the Directive remain valid under the GDPR.108 5.2.2 Binding corporate rules In addition to SCCs, BCRs Binding Corporate Rules provide a means to transfer data within a corporate group. Although certain actors in the group may be located in third countries which lack adequacy, the group as a whole offers an adequate level of protection. Unlike the Directive, the GDPR specifically recognises BCRs.109 For SP partners, using providers that have BCRs is also an option. 5.3 Derogations The GDPR also allows for the possibility of international transfers of data to third countries lacking both adequacy and the appropriate safeguards evaluated above.110 In certain limited situations, data can be transferred to third countries based on explicit consent, the performance or conclusion of a contract, or when the transfer is necessary for important reasons of public interest , among 103 GDPR Art 46 1 . See further GDPR Recital 108. At the time of writing, no certification schemes or codes of conduct approved for international transfers have been completed. 104 GDPR Art 46 2 a f and 46 3 a b . For further details on binding corporate rules, see GDPR Art 47. 105 GDPR Art 46 3 a . 106 GDPR Art 46 2 . 107 WP29 196 2012 18 9. 108 GDPR Art 46 5 . 109 GDPR Art 47. 110 GDPR Art 49   HBP_DPM_20191105 Pu Public 5 Nov 2019 Page 59 71 others.111 However, such transfers have limited applicability and should only take place when other means are unavailable and the transfers are not reoccurring.112 In short, although the exception is available, SP partners cannot build their data sharing plans around these derogations. The derogations do not provide long term solutions.113 International Data transfers in the HBP 1. Data transfers within the EU EEA No restriction 2. Data transfers to Andorra, Argentina, Canada commercial organisations , Faroe Islands, Guernsey, Israel, Isle of Man, Jersey, New Zealand, Switzerland, Uruguay No restriction 3. Data Transfers with appropriate safeguards to guarantee that the fundamental rights of data subjects are protected. These tools include Standard Contractual Clauses SCCs Binding corporate rules BCRs . Generally set up by a provider. Privacy Shield Derogations limited International data transfers are one of the most complex aspects of EU data protection law. It is also an area with ongoing litigation challenging some of the means for transfer i.e. Privacy Shield and SCCs . The DPO will monitor changes and provide updates. 111 GDPR Art 49 1 a f . 112 GDPR Art 49 1 . 113 The European Data Protection Board EDPB adopted Guidelines 2 2018 on derogations of Article 49 under Regulation 2016 679. Available at   HBP_DPM_20191105 Pu Public 5 Nov 2019 Page 60 71 Part II Data Contribution and Model Organism Data Animal Data The policies described in this section were developed with particular attention to the work of the Neuroinformatics Platform NIP, SP5 , but they apply to all data in the HBP. In particular, this section focuses on model organism data animal data . The HBP adopts the policies set out in this section in order to Facilitate the formal publication of data sets, as well as enabling the tracking of their usage through citation, data licenses, and ethical approvals. Support transparency and openness of the research it undertakes. Ensure continuing availability of data with the intent of securing sustainable long term use, teaching, further research, public access, reproducibility, etc. . Ensure that expectations with regard to data handling are transparent and accessible. Comply with all data related regulations and legislation, in particular those related to data protection. Ensure that all data registered and used in the HBP comply with ethical and legal requirements. Furthermore, this document aims to reconcile ethical and legal requirements with the FAIR Guiding Principles for scientific data management and stewardship and implementation level policies described in the Research Data Alliance RDA Practical Policy document. Data policy for large and international collaborations in neuro ICT involving technical, animal and human data raises many questions that are not fully settled. The HBP data policies will therefore need to be continually monitored and developed in this area. 6. Model Organism Data 6.1 Data Contributors Data Contributors in the HBP are the PIs of the project, or the persons whom they appoint to represent them. It is assumed that task leaders are PIs unless other information is provided. The responsibility for ensuring that all data that are made available to and used in the HBP comply with ethical and legal requirements rests with the Data Contributor who makes the data available. They need to 1. Provide information about the Ethics authority which approved the research undertaken and the ID number of the approval, confirm that the research complies with EU ethics principles, and that they are willing to undergo an ethics audit see Ethics compliance, below . 2. Upload their data to HBP storage, provide metadata, and undergo data curation see Data registration, below . 3. Give permission for the use of the data by choosing a licence for the sharing of data see Data licensing, below , and decide on a possible embargo period before public release. Where the Data Contributor is not an HBP PI, they need to be sponsored by an HBP PI who accepts responsibility for ensuring that the conditions are met.   HBP_DPM_20191105 Pu Public 5 Nov 2019 Page 61 71 6.2 HBP storage and Knowledge Graph HBP storage is persistent data storage provided by the HBP digital infrastructure service providers. Knowledge Graph is the provenance based metadata database provided by HBP digital infrastructure service providers. Data Contributors are provided with information about how to upload their data to HBP storage and how to provide metadata. This process is facilitated by the HBP Data Curation Team and outlined in the Data Registration Process below . Data in HBP storage is either open access, under a defined license see below , or under embargo with access for selected researchers only, as determined by the Data Contributor. Metadata for data stored in HBP storage will be stored in the HBP Knowledge Graph. All metadata in the HBP Knowledge Graph are openly searchable. 6.3 Data Registration Data registration is the process by which data are made accessible to via HBP storage and Knowledge Graph, below referred to as the HBP digital infrastructure. The following flowchart provides an overview of the steps required to register data with the HBP   HBP_DPM_20191105 Pu Public 5 Nov 2019 Page 62 71 Before data can be accepted by and made accessible via the HBP digital infrastructure, they need to be cleared to ensure compliance with ethical and legal requirements. To make data visible to services comprising or connected to the HBP digital infrastructure, they must be registered in an index which is presently developed and maintained by the Neuroinformatics Platform. The registration process ensures that Data are cleared to ensure compliance with ethical and legal requirements. Data are annotated with metadata, based on ontologies or controlled vocabularies, to the extent that this is possible.   HBP_DPM_20191105 Pu Public 5 Nov 2019 Page 63 71 In cases where this is not possible, HBP digital infrastructure service providers will make an effort to ensure that newly produced ontologies are created maintained at a level that is equivalent with established services in the biomedical research community. Data are serialised in a format that is registered in a data format index. To ensure that data remain accessible after they have initially been made accessible, HBP maintains a list of serialisation formats. The addition of data formats will be possible during the registration process. Possible uses and reuse of the data are expressed via the use of well documented licenses and embargo. All data shared through the HBP digital infrastructure services should be annotated with a license describing the conditions for use. The Data Contributor decides on the license that should apply from a list of licenses accepted by the HBP see below and whether or not an embargo period shall be imposed before release. 6.4 Ethics compliance animal data For data sourced from animal studies commissioned by financed through the HBP, the Data Contributor confirms that the data were collected in research that complied with Ethical principles as outlined by the Horizon 2020 Ethics Self Assessment114 Applicable international, EU and national law in particular, EU Directive 2010 63 EU 115. Where the research was undertaken in an EU Member State with stricter rules, these were adhered to. The research favoured alternatives to animal use, and implemented the principles of replacement, reduction and refinement three Rs . If the data included Non human primates NHPs , the Data Contributor is aware of the special conditions linked to this. The use of great apes requires very exceptional justification, and must be specifically authorised by the Commission Agency. The above conditions are normally considered to be met, if the research is covered by a valid ethics approval from a competent authority within an EU Member State. For data re used from animal studies conducted outside of the scope of HBP without funding from HBP Data that are sourced from facilities which have proven compliance with the US ILAR Guide for the Care and Use of Laboratory Animals116 may be used. This Guide is a set of standards which are well accepted internationally and govern the housing, care and treatment of laboratory animals. For rodents, they are considered a globally acceptable standard. Such compliance can be substantiated by an AAALAC Association for Assessment and Accreditation 114 _guidance_ethics_self_assess_en.pdf 115 This Directive aims at limiting the use of animal testing for scientific purposes and provides for common standards for the welfare of animals that are used including authorisations, restrictions for the use of certain kinds of animals, standards for procedures, minimum requirements for personnel, recording and traceability, care and accommodation . 116 accessed 23.08.2016   HBP_DPM_20191105 Pu Public 5 Nov 2019 Page 64 71 of Laboratory Animal Care accreditation, or by a publication in an international tier 1 peer reviewed journal that endorses the ARRIVE guidelines.117 In cases where the above cannot be guaranteed due to unresolvable historic provenance gaps e.g. some bioinformatics data in public databases , registration of data may still be possible, but requires approval by the HBP via an audit. The Data Contributor is willing to comply with an audit by the HBP and provide the above evidence to the HBP within 2 weeks of receiving a request. The Data Contributor is aware that failure to provide relevant evidence to an HBP audit can lead to the removal of the data from the HBP systems, the closing of their user account, and a notification of their institution s ethics bodies concerning potentially unethical practice. Data Contributors need to confirm that they have evidence to demonstrate the compliance of their data with these principles. They will be asked to provide the details of the competent authority that gave approval for the research and use of data as well as an approval number. They will accept audit procedures and provide detailed information and documentation. For further guidance, it is recommended that Contributors consult the HBP SOP on Animal Data118. 6.5 Data Licensing This section addresses HBP policy for data licensing. While software can be considered data, this section does not relate to software licensing policies. All data registered with the HBP that are protected by copyright needs to be licensed for further use by the owner. The Data Contributor must choose during the process of registration which licence is appropriate and will be used to make the data available. The HBP allows users to choose any Creative Commons version 4.0 licence119. The default option is the most open licence, CC BY. The Creative Commons licenses below have been selected for their compatibility with the FPA CA. The Data Contributor may choose to impose an embargo on the access to data. In the embargo period, only selected researchers, as determined by the Data Contributor, have access to the data. The resulting choice of licences is as follows 117 accessed 17.08.2016 118 8faa1426c14c updated_m18__sga1_d1242_d715_d2_animal_data__third_countriesrequirement_no_5.pdf 119   HBP_DPM_20191105 Pu Public 5 Nov 2019 Page 65 71 Do you allow commercial uses of your work Yes No Do you allow adaptations of your work to be shared Yes Attribution 4.0 International this is the default Attribution NonCommercial 4.0 International No Attribution NoDerivatives 4.0 International Attribution NonCommercial NoDerivatives 4.0 International Yes, as long as others share alike Attribution ShareAlike 4.0 International Selected License Attribution NonCommercial ShareAlike 4.0 International DPM Inventories and Worksheets The following section is reserved for templates worksheets. Inventory I Controller SP Documentation Worksheet HBP GDPR Documentation Worksheet Data Controller The inventory below is a tool of SPs to evaluate the data they have in their project as personal. HBP GDPR Article 30 Documentation Worksheet Data Controller Initial survey to gather information for documentation requirements. Fill in the following categories. For further explanation, see the DPM. SP partner Name and role in HBP   HBP_DPM_20191105 Pu Public 5 Nov 2019 Page 66 71 Name Role of individual completing Name of Organisation Specific Department Local Data Protection Officer if applicable Data protection contact person if different from the DPO Joint Controller if applicable Name of Organisation Specific Department Contact Person Contact Information Local Data Protection Officer if applicable Data protection contact person Data Processor s Contact Person Contact Information Name of Organisation Location s of processor s If a cloud service provider, provide name and a contract   HBP_DPM_20191105 Pu Public 5 Nov 2019 Page 67 71 Local Data Protection Officer if applicable Data protection contact person Please attach a copy of that agreement if possible Short Description of Solution System s Description of the Purpose of Processing Short description e.g. medical research Personal Data Inventory Categories Who do you hold data about e.g. patients, survey participants, external researchers What data do you hold about them e.g. contact details, survey results, medical records, etc. Data Subjects list the primary categories of data subjects including patients, employees, researchers etc. Personal Data list all types of personal data processed in the system including 1 General personal data e.g. names, account data . 2 Sensitive personal data e.g. medical reports, MRIs, or other genetic data .   HBP_DPM_20191105 Pu Public 5 Nov 2019 Page 68 71 Source of the Personal Data e.g. patient, hospital, partner university, external research project, public domain etc. . International Transfers of Personal Data Data Flow 1 Does the SP partner transfer data outside of the EU EEA If so, please list countries 2 If the SP partner transfers data outside of the EU EEA, what safeguards are in place e.g. SCCs, BCRs, Privacy Shield, etc. . 3 Does the SP partner receive data from a country or countries outside of the EU EEA If so, please list countries Data Retention and Erasure Policy How long do you store the personal data you collect Do you have a policy for erasure or deletion of data Processing Operations Describe the type of processing that takes place. For example, storage, anonymisation or de identification processes creation of statistics etc. Legal Basis for the Processing of Personal Data   HBP_DPM_20191105 Pu Public 5 Nov 2019 Page 69 71 Describe the legal basis used for the data processing e.g. consent, performance of a contract, compliance with a legal obligation, etc. . If the personal data processed in the SP partner uses more than one legal basis, specify the basis as applied to the personal data. Legal Basis for Processing of Sensitive Personal Data Describe the legal basis used for the data processing e.g. explicit consent . General description of technical and organisational security measures e.g. encrypted storage, access controls etc. Have your SP partners had a Privacy Impact Assessment PIA or a Data Protection Impact Assessment If so, please send a copy of the impact assessment to the DPO. Can you document that you have followed best practices regarding data security In particular, have you obtained certifications, audits accredited or otherwise . Data Protection by Design and by Default Have you implemented the principles of data protection by design and default Briefly describe any processes tools you apply including data minimisation, de identification e.g. pseudonymisation or anonymisation. Data Processing Agreements   HBP_DPM_20191105 Pu Public 5 Nov 2019 Page 70 71 Controller Do you have a data processing agreement with processors Name and location of processors Please attach a copy of that agreement if possible Processor Name of controller Do you use subcontractors or sub processors Do you have a process in place for obtaining controller consent for adding new processors Name and locations of processors General Do you have access to legal counsel for data protection related queries Do you have a GDPR readiness program If so, what is the completion status Please attach copies of relevant documents including PIAs, DPIAs, internal analysis from GDPR projects   HBP_DPM_20191105 Pu Public 5 Nov 2019 Page 71 71 Inventory II DPIA Template Worksheet inventory draft under revision. Inventory III Data Protection by Design and Data Protection by Default Worksheet inventory draft under revision. Inventory IV General Security of Personal Data Inventory Worksheet inventory draft under revision. Overview provided above. 