 industry.gov.au corporateplan Corporate Plan 2023 24  Acknowledgement of Country Our department recognises the First Peoples of this Nation and their ongoing cultural and spiritual connections to the lands, waters, seas, skies, and communities. We Acknowledge First Nations Peoples as the Traditional Custodians and Lore Keepers of the oldest living culture and pay respects to their Elders past and present. We extend that respect to all First Nations Peoples. Meeting Place icon by DISR employee Amy Huggins Artwork above by Lynnice Church, 2021 About the artist and the artwork Mrs Lynnice Letty Church is a Ngunnawal, Wiradjuri and Kamilaroi woman who lives on her traditional lands in Canberra Ngunnawal Country . A contemporary Aboriginal artist, Lynnice is self taught and has painted since she was a young girl. Her artwork reflects the continuing connection of Aboriginal culture in the context of today s society. She has always been passionate about all forms of art as expression, particularly Aboriginal art and culture and interpreting this into a modern day landscape. The artwork shows the importance of listening, sharing and building knowledge and understanding of Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander culture to create a culturally safe space. This is shown by the 2 shields and people sitting either side of the centre circle which symbolises the rich culture and experiences that our people bring and are able to share. The centre circle shows this point of connection and the importance of relationships that can only be built through respect, collaboration and trust.  1 Corporate Plan 2023 24 Secretary s introduction The Department of Industry, Science and Resources and our broader portfolio are integral to the Australian Government s economic agenda. Our purpose is to help the government build a better future for all Australians through enabling a productive, resilient and sustainable economy, enriched by science and technology. We do this by growing innovative and competitive businesses, industries and regions investing in science and technology strengthening the resources sector. In a complex and interconnected world, we work with other Australian Government agencies, states and territories, international counterparts and a range of external stakeholders. This enables us to deliver integrated policy advice and implement effective policies and programs. Our portfolio is at the heart of the government s plan to revitalise Australian industry, support the transition to net zero and make the most of new and emerging technologies. This will create productive, sustainable and high value jobs in the economy of tomorrow. Our portfolio supports businesses and industries by reducing barriers to productivity, designing appropriate regulatory frameworks and providing targeted investment and services. We help Australia s industries and resources sectors respond to ongoing economic pressures and geopolitical tensions. We place people and businesses at the centre of our programs and services, consistent with the broader Australian Public Service reform agenda, and are committed to strengthening relationships with First Nations Peoples, communities and organisations. We work effectively thanks to the capability of our people, systems and practices. We do everything with integrity and strive to be a model employer. We will maintain our collaborative, supportive and inclusive culture where everyone feels valued and can perform at their best. This corporate plan for 2023 24 to 2027 28 sets out how we will achieve our purpose and implement the government s priorities. It provides an overview of our operating environment, strategic priorities, activities, risks, capabilities and how we measure our performance. I am pleased to present our corporate plan as required under paragraph 35 1 b of the Public Governance, Performance and Accountability Act 2013. This is our main planning document and was prepared according to the requirements of the PGPA Act. I look forward to reporting on our progress in the performance statements included in our annual report. Meghan Quinn PSM Secretary 31 August 2023  2 Corporate Plan 2023 24  3 Corporate Plan 2023 24 Our purpose and key activities Our purpose Building a better future for all Australians through enabling a productive, resilient and sustainable economy, enriched by science and technology Industry and Science Resources Our key activities Key Activity 1.1 Growing innovative and competitive businesses, industries and regions Key Activity 1.2 Investing in science and technology Key Activity 1.3 Supporting a strong resources sector1 1 Including providing expert advice to the Department of Defence to support initial implementation of the Nuclear Powered Submarine Program.   4 Corporate Plan 2023 24 Our key activities and strategic priorities We will achieve our purpose through the following key activities and strategic priorities  5 Corporate Plan 2023 24 Key activity 1.1 growing innovative and competitive businesses, industries and regions We are building and supporting a flexible, resilient and dynamic economic base for Australia that identifies and adapts to new markets and emerging opportunities. Our strategic priorities under this activity include Diversifying and transforming Australia s industry to secure future prosperity through the National Reconstruction Fund, which will target investments in priority areas, including renewables and low emission technologies medical science transport value add in agriculture, forestry and fisheries value add in resources defence capability enabling capabilities. Providing advice and targeted funding to support innovative small to medium enterprises to commercialise their ideas and grow their business through the Industry Growth Program. Supporting industrial decarbonisation sectoral planning to maximise the benefits of the global transition to net zero. By providing long term policy certainty, we will drive investment in green manufacturing, low emissions and renewable technologies. Implementing the National Battery Strategy to guide governments and industry towards a shared vision of end to end battery manufacturing and help Australia transition to renewable energy. Supporting implementation of the Buy Australian Plan to improve local industry participation opportunities through the government s purchasing power. Boosting collaboration, commercialisation and use of Australian research and development by co administering the Research and Development Tax Incentive. Delivering grants programs to address barriers to scale and competitiveness for Australian manufacturers develop domestic manufacturing capabilities benefit regional communities upskill each sector s workforce to ensure Australia can make things again. Enhancing regulatory settings for businesses and the community through harmonised national frameworks that promote ethical and sustainable market growth, the responsible use of technology and encourage business collaboration, innovation and investment. Boosting critical supply chains and economic resilience by encouraging diversification of Australian industry and its imports, and promoting Australia as a reliable, responsible and sustainable partner. This includes bolstering capability to identify and address risk in critical supply chains. Developing Australia s space capability through the work of the Australian Space Agency, including its regulatory functions and leadership of the civil space sector. Improving the effectiveness of government services and investment by ensuring businesses benefit from the suite of government initiatives via the Single Business Service and the Business Outreach Network. Continuing investment in Australia s National Centre for Asia Capability Asialink Business to help businesses better engage with Asia and grow stronger economic ties.  6 Corporate Plan 2023 24 Key activity 1.2 investing in science and technology Science and technology are key to economic growth and underpin the competitiveness of our businesses and the adaptability of our society. Our strategic priorities under this activity include Building a stronger science sector to help solve challenges, improve productivity and wellbeing, and boost the science, technology, engineering and mathematics STEM pipeline. The refresh of the National Science and Research Priorities and National Science Statement will underpin a strong science sector by providing a unified sense of purpose for Australia s science and research communities. Improving diversity in STEM, including through the independent Pathway to Diversity in STEM Review looking into what is working, what is not, and what needs to be done to improve overall diversity in STEM education, STEM industries and leadership, and the STEM skilled workforce. Providing independent science advice to government through the Office of the Chief Scientist to develop well informed responses to modern challenges and identifying opportunities to improve the science and research system. Aligning our international and domestic science and technology priorities to build our local capability, including through leveraging existing relationships and international agreements, and enhancing our dialogues and partnerships in science and technology. Building strong collaboration through providing short to long term funding for industry led research collaborations through the Cooperative Research Centres Program. Growing Australia s critical technologies industries such as quantum, robotics and artificial intelligence to boost our economy and create high value jobs that will help retain talent in Australia. Supporting Australia s digital capability through targeted initiatives to accelerate the adoption of technologies and foster transformation across the economy. Ensuring Australia has the advanced measurement science it needs to accelerate our economy and underpin safety assurance, by developing and harnessing the expertise of the National Measurement Institute. Growing long term science and technology capabilities through Questacon s science engagement activities and ensuring they reach diverse communities, including those in remote and regional Australia.  7 Corporate Plan 2023 24 Key activity 1.3 supporting a strong resources sector A sustainable Australian resources sector attracts private sector investment, encourages the use of innovative technologies and meets community expectations. Our strategic priorities under this activity include Growing national prosperity through a strong and resilient resources sector that continues to create sustainable and high value jobs, including in regional and remote communities, and maintains Australia s reputation as a stable and reliable energy supplier to overseas markets. Supporting the sector to plan and contribute to the global transition to net zero through emissions reduction, and capitalising on opportunities presented in a low emissions economy, including delivery of the Future Gas Strategy. Accelerating the growth of Australia s critical minerals sector to support new clean energy technologies in Australia and overseas, including delivery of the Critical Minerals Strategy. Encouraging proactive planning for decommissioning and rehabilitation activities through developing a roadmap for establishing a decommissioning industry in Australia, overseeing decommissioning of the Laminaria Corrallina oil fields and Northern Endeavour facility, and the effective rehabilitation of the Ranger and Rum Jungle uranium mine sites and the former nuclear testing site at Maralinga. Progressing a responsible and sustainable approach to long term management and disposal of Australia s radioactive waste, including through the Australian Radioactive Waste Agency ARWA and expert advice to the Department of Defence to support initial implementation of the Nuclear Powered Submarine Program. Addressing community expectations on environmental, social and governance ESG practices, including through true partnerships with First Nations Peoples and communities, improving gender equality, skills and safety, and reviewing the environmental management regime for offshore petroleum and greenhouse gas storage activities.  Our operating environment 8 Corporate Plan 2023 24  9 Corporate Plan 2023 24 Adaptability and resilience in a disruptive and uncertain economic environment The Australian economy has shown strength through its post pandemic recovery and in the face of geopolitical instability. However, the economic environment remains uncertain and is subject to continued disruption, including in energy, industrial and financial markets. Future economic growth and prosperity will be challenged by weaker global economic conditions, persistent inflation and higher interest rates, as well as a range of structural shifts in the domestic economy. Our long term prosperity relies on continued productivity growth, but Australia s productivity growth has slowed over the past decade, as it has in other advanced economies. Encouraging the diffusion of innovation across the economy, addressing barriers to adoption of technology and supporting a successful transition to net zero will be central in lifting productivity growth. Our key sectors will need to become more adaptable and resilient so they can respond to, and seize, the opportunities from net zero transition, technology transformation and ongoing global tensions that will affect Australia s economic outlook over the coming years. Our policy advice and program implementation will be influenced by many factors, including responding to the implications of geo strategic shifts, adapting to and mitigating against climate change, and supporting more equitable outcomes for all Australians. This includes economic empowerment for disadvantaged groups, such as First Nations Peoples, and ensuring a skilled and adaptable workforce all of which will be necessary to support productivity and economic growth.  10 Corporate Plan 2023 24 Growing business and industry In this operating environment, we will support the government to strengthen Australia s prosperity by stimulating high growth industries and commercialising more Australian research. We will support the government s agenda to grow innovative and competitive businesses, industries and regions. This includes kickstarting future green industries and enabling Australians to take advantage of the economic opportunities from the global net zero transition. We are doing this through a range of cross cutting and targeted programs that support economic resilience, sovereign capability and new manufacturing and commercialisation opportunities. We are establishing the 15 billion National Reconstruction Fund NRF , a major part of the government s Future Made in Australia agenda. The NRF will provide finance for projects that diversify and transform Australia s industry and economy. Through the NRF, the government is helping secure Australia s future prosperity and driving sustainable economic growth. The NRF will complement other initiatives that help develop domestic manufacturing capabilities and upskill the sector s workforce. We will deliver co investment plans that support growth and competitiveness by identifying high level investment opportunities in each of the NRF priority areas. We are establishing the Industry Growth Program, which will further support the government s commitment to rebuilding Australia s industrial capability. The program will support small to medium enterprises in NRF priority areas through their most challenging development phase to commercialise their innovative ideas and grow their businesses. The Industry Growth Program complements other initiatives to help translate Australia s business research and ideas into new, high value, in demand products and services. We are building on the government s decarbonisation and transformation objectives to deliver strong outcomes for the Australian economy. This includes helping position industry sectors to meet the government s net zero ambitions. We are working with government, industry, business, researchers and communities to deliver the Industrial and Built Environment Sector Plans. These plans will map out decarbonisation pathways by 2050 for key industries. Domestic manufacturing supports our sovereign capability and provides key inputs to the energy transition. These plans will identify avenues to reduce emissions while boosting growth and competitiveness. We will drive the delivery of the Australian Made Battery Plan, including publishing Australia s first National Battery Strategy, supporting the creation of a Battery Manufacturing Precinct, and implementing the Powering Australia Industry Growth Centre, which will support Australian businesses develop and adopt new renewable technologies, including batteries. The Australian Made Battery Plan complements other government priorities such as the NRF, Powering Australia including the National Electric Vehicle Strategy and Australia s emissions reduction target , Rewiring the Nation, the Critical Minerals Strategy and the Buy Australian Plan. Through the Buy Australian Plan, we are working with industry and government to leverage government purchasing power and improve procurement processes to help build industry capability and strengthen domestic supply chains. The importance of secure and resilient supply chains has been demonstrated over recent years. Our Office of Supply Chain Resilience will continue supporting the government s supply chain work with domestic and international partners. This includes identifying and monitoring vulnerabilities in supply chains and improving their resilience to facilitate ongoing access to critical goods and services. We will ensure a responsible regulatory framework for space activities so that space services, capability and investment support Australia s transition to a high tech future, including underpinning our manufacturing industries. Energy security is a continuing challenge alongside the longer term transition to lower emission energy sources, both of which have significant implications for people and businesses. We are supporting the government s energy market reform agenda to ensure Australian industry can access secure and affordable energy as it transitions to lower emission energy sources. Key Activity 1.1  11 Corporate Plan 2023 24 Rapid scientific and technological advancement Science and technology are essential to addressing national challenges. They underpin the development of new jobs, businesses and industries, and enable existing industries and business to innovate and grow. We will help the government create an environment that develops Australian know how and harnesses investments in science and technology to improve the lives of Australians. We are revitalising the National Science and Research Priorities and renewing the National Science Statement to provide a long term vision for Australian science, weave First Nations Peoples knowledge together with our broader science systems, and better align effort and investment to deliver greater benefits for all Australians. We are providing targeted support to critical and emerging technologies that make the most of Australia s potential and deliver solutions to real world problems for commercial and societal gain. This includes support for next generation technologies such as quantum, robotics and artificial intelligence. We are building international partnerships to showcase Australian knowledge and ensure access to international science and technology developments. We work with Australian and international organisations to establish trusted technology frameworks and shape the global standards and ethics that will guide the development of safe and trusted technologies. We ensure Australians receive the maximum benefits from rapidly advancing digital technologies. This includes encouraging small and medium businesses to adopt digital technologies helping Australians to develop the digital skills to participate in the modern workforce contributing to regulations to guide those developing or using new technologies monitoring and coordinating digital technology policies across government so they are cohesive and consistent. We will continue encouraging greater diversity and the inclusion of women and under represented groups in STEM. The government has commissioned an independent review of the effectiveness of existing government programs in these areas and the cultural and structural barriers to participation and retention. The results of the review will help us identify and use approaches that improve diversity and inclusion. We provide independent science advice to government through the Office of the Chief Scientist and will continue working with the science and research community to promote, enable and harness Australia s world leading scientific research. We will continue to work with our public research institutions to ensure Australia has access to cutting edge research infrastructure and expertise. These institutions include Commonwealth Scientific and Industrial Research Organisation CSIRO Australian Nuclear Science and Technology Organisation ANSTO Geoscience Australia. Construction has started on the Square Kilometre Array, an innovative global project that will expand our understanding of the universe and supports jobs and growth in regional Australia. Questacon continues to play a vital role in improving the visibility, diversity and accessibility of STEM education and career pathways for young Australians. The government s recent boost to Questacon s funding will support critical property upgrades to maintain visitor safety. Ongoing funding will ensure inspiring and interactive experiences for visitors as well as national STEM programs that bring science and technology to people across Australia. The National Measurement Institute continues delivering independent, specialised measurement services and regulation that strengthen the international competitiveness of Australian businesses and underpin Australians confidence in products and services. All of these initiatives contribute to creating a resilient economy with more high value jobs being retained in Australia. This is consistent with the government s objective of growing technology related jobs to 1.2 million by 2030. Key Activity 1.2  12 Corporate Plan 2023 24 Supporting a strong resources sector A strong, competitive and sustainable resources sector is crucial to a thriving Australian economy. Our resources sector will provide export and employment opportunities well into the future, particularly in regional Australia. Our resources sector has an important role as Australia and the world transition to net zero emissions. The production of raw and processed critical minerals will need to scale up significantly, noting the International Energy Agency forecasts that global demand for minerals necessary for the development of clean energy technologies could double or even quadruple by 2040. We are prioritising implementation of the new Critical Minerals Strategy so Australia can contribute to global emissions reduction goals while seizing the opportunities of the energy transition. This includes supporting the deployment of emissions abatement technologies across the resources sector and providing targeted and proportionate support to grow our critical minerals sector, including through grants programs and investing in research and development. The Critical Minerals Strategy recognises that the Australian Government cannot deliver these objectives on its own. We need to work closely with industry, First Nations communities, the research community, state and territory governments, and our international partners. We will support collaboration to attract international investment and help Australia s critical minerals sector build, scale and grow its downstream processing capabilities. These policy actions and collaborations will help build more secure, resilient and diversified critical minerals supply chains. We need to carefully balance our domestic energy security with the needs of our trading partners, who invest in our resources sector and rely on Australian commodities for their own energy security. Reforms to the Australian Domestic Gas Security Mechanism allow for more flexibility in responding to domestic gas supply shortfalls and demonstrate Australia s commitment to remaining a reliable trade and investment partner. Australia s energy exports will support our trading partners as they implement decarbonisation initiatives to achieve net zero. Gas will continue to have a role in Australia, ensuring energy security while we increase renewable energy generation. Ensuring energy security will rely on Australia s ability to secure gas supply into the 2030s. The Future Gas Strategy will seek to address supply issues to support Australia s energy system to reach 82 per cent renewables by 2030 and become cleaner, cheaper and more reliable, while maintaining our international reputation as a trusted energy supplier. We will ensure an environmentally responsible approach to management in offshore oil and gas activities, radioactive waste, and mine rehabilitation. We will continue working with the offshore petroleum industry and regulators to encourage early and proactive planning for decommissioning and to ensure titleholders meet all costs and liabilities over the life of the project, including for decommissioning activities. We will develop a roadmap for establishing a decommissioning industry in Australia and continue decommissioning the Northern Endeavour facility. We will also oversee the effective rehabilitation of the Ranger and Rum Jungle uranium mine sites in the Northern Territory. Australian Radioactive Waste Agency ARWA leads the government s approach to safe and secure long term management and disposal of Australia s radioactive waste to protect people and the environment for generations to come. This work includes the development of pathways for disposal of low and intermediate level waste. ARWA is also providing expert advice to government to support the Department of Defence s consideration of radioactive waste management in relation to the Nuclear Powered Submarine Program. In supporting a strong resources sector, we will reinforce whole of government priorities, including improving engagement with First Nations Peoples and promoting gender equality and onsite safety, to ensure the development of Australia s resources is done safely and benefits all Australians. Key Activity 1.3  13 Corporate Plan 2023 24   14 Corporate Plan 2023 24 Our capability  15 Corporate Plan 2023 24 Our department is structured to align our functions with government priorities and build policy and corporate centres of excellence that support our key activities. The department maintains cross cutting policy and corporate capabilities that service the whole department. These include international and economic and data analytics capabilities, as well as corporate enabling capabilities. People Our people are our greatest asset, and we will continue to invest in their capability to deliver the department s outcomes. We will maintain and develop a diverse, capable, inclusive and professional workforce with enhanced tools and processes to help them do their jobs well. Our People Strategy outlines our priorities and promotes modern ways of working across our national footprint. It will drive our approach to attracting and retaining talent and includes implementing Australian Public Service reform programs for our workforce. In 2023 24, we will develop and implement a Property Strategy that is aligned to our workforce needs. Our property portfolio will bring together people, property, technology and security to create flexible and effective workspaces, appropriate for the functions undertaken at each site. Our properties and facilities will provide a positive work experience for our staff, increasing our ability to collaborate, connect and communicate with each other both physically and virtually. Our facilities will promote inclusion, accessibility, wellbeing and environmental sustainability while protecting our people, information and assets. We will leverage opportunities to locate ourselves, or co locate with other entities, in regional and metropolitan areas across Australia to target broader talent markets and attract and support employees nationally. We continue to create an environment that celebrates diversity, where employees are safe and feel they belong through our Accessibility Action Plan 2020 25 Inclusion Strategy 2021 23 Safety, Health and Wellbeing Strategy 2020 23 Stretch Reconciliation Action Plan 2023 2026. Cross government services Our footprint covers Australia so our people can work directly with stakeholders. Our workforce of over 3000 people is situated in more than 60 locations in Australia and overseas. Our Business Grants Hub works closely with policy partners to deliver grant administration services in 11 different Australian Government agencies. We also provide payroll and financial management systems to 12 Australian Government agencies, including our own department. In 2023 24, we will strengthen our service provision, introduce new ways to measure customer satisfaction and focus on continuous improvement to deliver financially sustainable and cost effective services. Through our Single Business Service business.gov.au and business contact centre we provide a continuum of support, connecting businesses with information from across all levels of government, depending on what they need and when they need it. In addition, we operate a network of regional managers across the country who are connected to regions, communities and industries and provide a local business connection. AusIndustry regional managers nurture partnerships and networks, provide connections, and help businesses navigate local, state and federal government. More than 80 per cent of all businesses in Australia are within 60km of an AusIndustry regional manager. In 2023 24, we will review the Single Business Service to ensure continuous improvement and alignment with whole of government service delivery models, and the regional managers network will include 2 First Nations regional managers dedicated to supporting First Nations businesses. We have been working across government to understand the impacts of Artificial Intelligence AI technologies. We recently partnered with the Digital Transformation Agency DTA to release interim guidance on the use of generative AI platforms to all Australian Government agencies as an initial step in the responsible and safe use of these technologies, ensuring we are able to explore the opportunities while managing the risks. During 2023 24 we will continue this important work jointly with the DTA and a cross agency taskforce.  16 Corporate Plan 2023 24 Technology and data Data and digital capabilities are key to all elements of our policy and program responsibilities. We will continue to leverage and build our data and digital capabilities to inform policy development and program delivery, and achieve better outcomes. Through the Data and Digital Government Strategy, the government has provided a vision that simple, secure and connected public services will be delivered for all people and business through world class data and digital capabilities by 2030. In 2023 24, we will focus on delivering secure technology platforms that provide effective and efficient services, and make it easier to innovate, collaborate and communicate. We will seek to continuously improve the products and services our employees use to do their best work while delivering innovative digital products that improve outcomes for our customers. Our priority is to create a sustainable ICT environment that delivers effective workplace collaboration, innovation, security management, and greater staff productivity. Underpinning this is the need to keep our data safe, which will build our status as a mature, data driven organisation. Our Digital Strategy focusses on realising our purpose, and details how we can protect and value digital information maintain and build our workforce capability establish shared expectations of digital delivery build financial sustainability and predictability uplift the digital experience for staff. We will strengthen our reputation as an exciting place to work by focusing on the digital literacy, accessibility, and efficiency of our employees, and exploring ways to leverage emerging technology. As we continue implementing our Data Strategy 2021 24, we are maximising the value of data and embedding data across our policies and program. The strategy covers all facets of the department s operation from back office functions to our core business, which includes timely and accurate reporting, evidence based policy formulation and evaluation. Our growing data maturity empowers our employees to use increasingly sophisticated modelling and machine learning tools through a data science platform location based analysis to understand and predict the regional impacts of changing policy environments and economic conditions program evaluation metrics incorporated at the program design stage to allow tracking of program performance from inception to outcomes. Our digital and data strategies will allow the department to harness the potential of new data and digital technologies, which will support better decision making and improved program design.  17 Corporate Plan 2023 24 Our portfolio entities and stakeholders We work closely with the other entities in our portfolio. We deliver services for the Australian community, whole economy and other Australian Government portfolios. Beyond our portfolio, we work with a diverse range of stakeholders and partners to support the government, industry, businesses and the Australian community. We are responsible for whole of government coordination and advice on cross cutting policy issues, including critical technologies, the digital economy and supply chain resilience. We draw on our strong relationships across the Australian Public Service to deliver these responsibilities. The department does not have any subsidiaries. The department and its portfolio entities use these tools to support sectors and stakeholders and achieve our purpose. WHO WE ARE TOOLS policies programs regulation and legislation data and analysis service delivery communications enabling services engagement STAKEHOLDERS Federal, state and territory entities businesses consumer bodies international partners not for proﬁt organisations First Nations Peoples professional associations regulators unions universities, academics and researchers science organisations employer associations   18 Corporate Plan 2023 24 Our risk management and oversight  19 Corporate Plan 2023 24 We are committed to ensuring integrity in the advice we provide, the decisions we make, the information we hold and the behaviours of our people. We are developing an Integrity Strategy to build staff capability, frameworks and policy maturity, and to improve our pro integrity culture. This will help our people better identify and manage risks and make decisions based on sound judgement. It will guide our approach to program management, project management and procurement. We have embedded a proactive risk management approach in our policies and processes, equipping staff with practical tools and techniques to make balanced and informed decisions in changing circumstances. Our governance structure provides strategic leadership and oversight of the department s enterprise risks and risk management framework to ensure we can respond with integrity to evolving opportunities and threats in line with our enterprise risk appetite. By communicating openly and honestly about risk, and actively engaging with it, we respond to rapidly changing operating environments engage with new and emerging risks pragmatically address the risks we share across the department and with other stakeholders. Our Risk Management Framework is consistent with the Commonwealth Risk Management Policy. We will continue refining our framework to reflect contemporary risk management practices. The tables below outline our enterprise risks and how we manage each one. Enterprise strategic risks Risk Risk management approach Confidence and trust We maintain the confidence and trust of government, industry and the public. We assess our outcomes against performance measures that are monitored regularly and published in our annual report. We engage, consult and collaborate with stakeholders to maintain confidence in our ability to deliver strategic initiatives and programs that support government policy. We actively manage risks, including incorporating new or emerging risk considerations into our governance. We keep the government and our ministers informed and prepared. Delivery We deliver key activities to achieve the department s strategic priorities. Relationship and influence We are influential, including with our complex and extensive stakeholder networks. Staff capability We attract, develop and retain the people capability we need. We use agile approaches to attract, recruit and retain staff to maximise outcomes and opportunities for our people. We continue to mature our diversity and inclusion strategies and provide all staff with leadership development opportunities in a supportive environment.  20 Corporate Plan 2023 24 Enterprise operational risks Risk Risk management approach Information and system security We protect our information and information systems. We continue to evolve our roadmap for optimising information and communication technology opportunities in response to security challenges. We strive to ensure our protective security is effective, meets the highest standards and aligns with government frameworks. Safe work environment We maintain a work environment that is safe and promotes wellbeing. We create a safe working environment for all, which is free from physical or psychological harm. We do this through governance of work health and safety practices and ongoing consultation with staff. Integrity We maintain good governance and ethical standards and adhere to our legal obligations. Our governance approach supports transparency in decision making, accountability and integrity. Our Executive Board and its sub committees manage enterprise risk oversight. This ensures risks are managed appropriately and we can respond to evolving opportunities and threats in line with the enterprise risk appetite. We implement government priorities in line with legislation, frameworks and guidance. Financial We maintain our financial sustainability. We implement financial governance mechanisms to ensure efficient, effective and transparent expenditure of public monies. We have open discussions to reallocate funding where required. We follow policies and legal requirements for necessary checks and qualifications before allocating any funding, grants or subsidies.  21 Corporate Plan 2023 24   22 Corporate Plan 2023 24 Our governance  23 Corporate Plan 2023 24 Accountable Authority Key governance committees People, Safety and Culture Committee Operations Committee Performance and Risk Committee Executive Board Audit and Risk Committee Financial Statements Sub committee Secretary Meghan Quinn PSM Department committees Independent committee chair Our strong governance arrangements help us to deliver our purpose and strategic priorities, and comply with our legislative, regulatory, financial and other obligations. Our governance committee structure includes the Executive Board and its sub committees. Sub committees cover people, safety and culture performance and risk operations enterprise information, protective and cyber security, and financial and property management . Our committee structure provides assurance and oversight of our management responsibilities and supports compliance with legislative, regulatory, financial and other obligations. This helps the Secretary discharge her oversight and governance obligations under the Public Governance, Performance and Accountability Act 2013 PGPA Act and s57 of the Public Service Act 1999.   24 Corporate Plan 2023 24 Our performance  25 Corporate Plan 2023 24 We measure and report on our performance to track progress against our purpose and key activities. This demonstrates accountability to our ministers, the government, the parliament and the Australian public. We report our performance in our annual report. Across the breadth of the department s activities, we measure outputs, efficiency, and effectiveness. Some of our strategic priorities relate to activities and programs that are too early in their development for meaningful output or outcome focused performance measures. We will consider establishing additional performance measures as these activities and programs progress. Regulator performance We deliver regulatory functions to support and enhance businesses and the Australian community. These functions are set out in the Australian Government regulator stocktake. The performance of our regulatory functions considers 3 best practice principles Continuous improvement and building trust regulators adopt a whole of system perspective, continuously improving their performance, capability and culture to build trust and confidence in Australia s regulatory settings. Risk based and data driven regulators manage risks proportionately and maintain essential safeguards while minimising regulatory burden. They leverage data and digital technology to support those they regulate to comply and grow. Collaboration and engagement regulators are transparent and responsive communicators, implementing regulations in a modern and collaborative way. Regulatory functions relating to a material component of the department s delivery of key activities are reflected in our performance measures. In 2023 24, we will continue reviewing our approach to regulator performance and performance measures, with reference to the 3 best practice principles, for reporting in our next annual report. Performance measures Our performance measures relate directly to our purpose and key activities. Performance measures are both qualitative and quantitative to assess our outputs, efficiency and effectiveness over time. Performance information for each key activity is set out as follows Performance measure used to track progress toward an intended result. Type of measure output, efficiency or effectiveness. Targets what success will look like. Why this matters the effect, difference or result we want to achieve to support our key activities and purpose. Data sources the information we will use to measure performance against the target. Methodology how the result is calculated. Changes from previous year this field is included for the first time in this corporate plan and allows comparisons between reporting periods. Department s regulatory functions any regulatory functions of relevance to the performance measure.  26 Corporate Plan 2023 24 Our portfolio budget statement PBS outcome statement Support economic growth, productivity and job creation for all Australians by investing in science, technology and commercialisation, growing innovative and competitive businesses, industries and regions, and supporting resources. Activity 1.1 growing innovative and competitive businesses, industries and regions This activity aims to support the growth of innovative and competitive businesses, industries and regions, and build a diversified, flexible, resilient and dynamic economic base that can identify and adapt to new markets and emerging opportunities. It relates to PBS 2023 24 Outcome 1, Program 1.1 and investment in commercialisation under Program 1.2. Performance measure Target 2023 24 to 2026 27 1. Business co investment through portfolio initiative funding Effectiveness Maintain an average of at least 1.20 of business co investment for every 1 of grant funding for portfolio programs that require business co investment Why this matters Investment in key sectors, including manufacturing and commercialisation, will have many flow on benefits to the broader economy. Data source The department s internally maintained Business Grants Management System and other records held by the department. Methodology The result is calculated by taking the sum of business co investment or co contribution across the department s grants programs and dividing by the grant funding delivered by the department. Changes from previous year No changes from 2022 23.  27 Corporate Plan 2023 24 Performance measure Target 2023 24 to 2026 27 2. Proportion of grants and services delivered to regional businesses Output 25 or more of total grants or services are delivered to regional businesses Why this matters Our regions are a significant contributor to Australia s economy. Helping unlock their economic potential by supporting regional businesses to enable job creation will help Australia s long term growth and sustainability. By measuring the proportion of grants and services being delivered in regional Australia, the department can assess whether businesses in the regions can access the support they need to succeed. Data source The department s internally maintained Business Grants Management System and data on regional businesses sourced from the Australian Bureau of Statistics ABS . Methodology The result is calculated by determining the proportion of grants and services delivered to business with a regional business address, within the reporting period, against all addresses of grant and services recipients. Changes from previous year No changes from 2022 23. Performance measure Target 2023 24 to 2026 27 3. Applicant satisfaction with the experience of the grants application process through the business.gov.au portal Effectiveness Year on year maintenance or increase in the proportion of applicants who are satisfied or very satisfied Why this matters As part of growing innovative and competitive businesses, the department aims to ensure businesses can easily access the assistance they need. We do this by focusing on streamlining the application process for grantees and continuously improving the interface that customers interact with when they apply for a grant. By measuring customer satisfaction with the process, we get a broad sense of whether businesses find the process of applying for assistance satisfactory. Data source The department s internally maintained Business Grants Management System. Methodology The result is calculated by determining the proportion of survey responses that report being either satisfied or very satisfied with their overall experience of the grants application process, against the total number of responses. Changes from previous year No changes from 2022 23.  28 Corporate Plan 2023 24 Performance measure Target 2023 24 to 2026 27 4. Effective regulation to assure the safety and security of space activities Effectiveness Zero fatalities, serious injuries or damage to other property as a result of authorised Australian space activities Why this matters Effective regulation, as set out in Space Launches and Returns Act 2018, aims for a reasonable balance between the removal of barriers to participation in space activities and the encouragement of innovation and entrepreneurship in the space industry and the safety of space activities and the risk of damage to persons or property. Data source Data for this measure is sourced from the department s records of authorised space activities under the Space Launches and Returns Act 2018 and any relevant accident or incident investigation reports during the reporting period. Post activity reports generated by the ministerially appointed launch safety officer or launch proponent will be used to verify the number of occurrences of fatalities, serious injury or damage to other property. Methodology This measure is based on quantitative data. The measure is derived from the number of fatalities, serious injuries or damage to other property as a result of authorised Australian space activities. Changes from previous year This measure s target and calculation method was amended since the 2022 23 corporate plan to more clearly align with performance. Department s regulatory functions This performance measure relates to the activities of the Office of the Space Regulator.  29 Corporate Plan 2023 24 Performance measure Target 2023 24 to 2026 27 5. Proportion of major projects that are compliant with their approved Australian Industry Participation AIP plans Effectiveness 100 of compliance reports without a breach requiring the use of legislative sanctions Why this matters By ensuring compliance with AIP plans, the Australian Industry Participation Authority helps ensure that Australian entities are provided full, fair and reasonable opportunity to supply key goods and services to major Australian projects. Data source Australian Jobs Act 2013 compliance reports and associated evidence provided by the proponent, as well as data derived from compliance reports Methodology Percentage of current projects with a compliance breach of the approved AIP plans that required the use of legislative sanctions compared to number of current projects with accepted compliance reports and no use of legislative sanctions i.e. number of non compliant compliance reports divided by total number of compliance reports multiplied by one hundred . Changes from previous year No changes from 2022 23. Department s regulatory functions This performance measure relates to the activities of the Australian Industry Participation Authority. Performance measure Target 2023 24 to 2026 27 6. Anti Dumping Commission compliance with legislated and World Trade Organization timeframes is maintained or improved Efficiency Timeframes for the completion of all case types are maintained or improved Why this matters In administering an anti dumping system the department seeks to support Australian industry and the economy by remedying proven instances of unfair international trade. Data sources Anti Dumping Commission s Case Management System. Methodology The number of cases and case types, case timeframes, and outcomes of cases are recorded in the Anti Dumping Commission s Case Management System. Data is manually entered at case commencement and legislative timeframes are pre populated with internal system validation. Permitted extensions are recorded in the system and dates are amended to reflect permitted changes. Changes from previous year This is a new performance measure established after publication of the 2022 23 corporate plan. Department s regulatory functions This performance measure relates to the activities of the Anti Dumping Commission.  30 Corporate Plan 2023 24 Performance measure Target 2023 24 to 2026 27 7. Applications for registration of research and development activities through the Research and Development Tax Incentive R DTI are processed within 40 business days for first time registrants 20 business days for registrants that have applied within 6 months after the end of the income period 80 business days for registrations submitted from 6 to 10 months after the end of the income period. Efficiency 95 of companies processed within the allotted timeframes for each criterion Why this matters The measure outlines how quickly the department processes R DTI applications, of which around 12,000 per year are lodged. An efficient registration process ensures companies receive certainty early and they can file their income tax returns with the ATO to receive the benefit of the program in a timely manner. Data source R DTI program data, held by the department. Methodology The method for calculating the measure is to determine the difference in days between The date the company submitted their registration application The date the department registered the application. From this, the proportion of companies processed within the allotted timeframes is determined. Changes from previous year No changes from 2022 23. Department s regulatory functions This performance measure relates to the activities of the R DTI Branch.  31 Corporate Plan 2023 24 Activity 1.2 investing in science and technology This activity aims to boost our science and technology capability to facilitate the development and uptake of new ideas and technology and build a strong base for science to be used in Australian decision making. It relates to PBS 2023 24 Outcome 1, Program 1.2, except where investment in commercialisation is covered by Key Activity 1.1. Performance measure Target 2023 24 to 2026 27 8. Grow the number of technology related jobs to 1.2 million by 2030 Effectiveness Year on year increase Why this matters Australia s technology and digital capability is vital in supporting Australian businesses competitiveness, scale and resilience. The adoption of technology plays a pivotal role in our economy and will continue to drive productivity and improve living standards. This measure enables the department to track the growth of Australia s direct and indirect technology sectors and to monitor progress towards the government s target of reaching 1.2 million technology related jobs by 2030. Data source ABS Labour Force, Australia, detailed dataset. Methodology The calculation of the total number of technology related jobs is based on the Tech sector taxonomy outlined on pages 17 18 of the Tech Council of Australia report Australia s tech jobs opportunity. Changes from previous year No changes from 2022 23. Performance measure Target 2023 24 to 2026 27 9. Number of businesses establishing research focused collaborations that are facilitated by portfolio programs Effectiveness Maintain the number of businesses collaborating year on year Why this matters Bridging science and industry through business research collaboration is essential to help Australia solve problems and bring new technologies, products and services to the market. To drive this collaborative culture, the department runs several initiatives to support business research collaborations. This measure will drive accountability to ensure grants awarded develop research focused collaborations. Data source The department s internally maintained Business Grants Management System and other records held by the department. Methodology The result is calculated by taking the sum of all project partners across the relevant grant funding programs delivered by the department. Changes from previous year Changes to the underlying programs that contribute to the performance measure.  32 Corporate Plan 2023 24 Performance measure Target 2023 24 to 2026 27 10. Percentage of Questacon s national STEM events reaching lower socio economic, regional and remote communities Effectiveness Percentage of Questacon s national STEM events reaching lower socio economic communities Annual Target 50 regional and remote communities Annual Target 60 Why this matters Questacon, Australia s National Science and Technology Centre, attracts up to half a million visitors each year from the public and schools to enjoy exhibits, shows and inspirational learning experiences at our centre in Canberra. Questacon aims to make visible the value of science and technology to everyone s lives, the importance of developing STEM skills, and the future STEM careers can offer. We are committed to overcoming social disadvantage and geographic isolation as a barrier to engagement with science, technology and innovation.  Our national touring and virtual programs are a critical part of Questacon enabling Australians to engage with science, technology, and innovation wherever they are by reaching schools and communities that would otherwise have limited access to a Questacon experience. These programs are free to schools, reducing cost barriers to participation. Data source The primary data source is attendance data recorded by Questacon in a custom database Data Core for national activities as defined by relevant departmental programs or initiatives. The Australian Curriculum, Assessment and Reporting Authority ACARA My Schools and the Australian Bureau of Statistics ABS remoteness data are linked to Data Core using the ACARA School ID for schools and event venue postcode in the case of community activities. Methodology 1 Lower socio economic communities are calculated by the percentage of schools engaged with an Index of Community Socio Educational Advantage value of 1000 and the percentage of communities engaged in postcodes with a Socio Economic Indexes for Areas decile value of 6. 2 Regional and remote communities are calculated by the percentage of schools and communities engaged from postcodes defined as inner regional, outer regional, remote or very remote under the ABS Remoteness Structure. Changes from previous year This is a new performance measure established after publication of the 2022 23 corporate plan.  33 Corporate Plan 2023 24 Performance measure Target 2023 24 to 2026 27 11. Raising awareness of the importance of STEM through the delivery of portfolio initiative Effectiveness Proportion of Australians parents, educators and young Australians who consider STEM skills important when considering employment 87 Why this matters Skills in science, technology, engineering and maths STEM are important for a thriving scientific and technology enabled economy and vital in equipping Australians with the skills required to undertake the jobs of the future. The department s policies and programs support community wide STEM engagement. While the department s performance is the focus on this measure, there are many factors outside of the department s control, which contribute to performance against the target. Data source The Youth in STEM research report and STEM influencer report produced by Youth Insight the research arm of Student Edge is the primary data source, gathered through a nationwide survey of a representative sample of the target population. Reports are produced on an alternating biennial basis. Methodology Results for the measure are directly taken from the Youth in STEM research report STEM influencer report Parents STEM influencer report Teachers and career advisors. The calculation methodology for the STEM Equity Monitor and its supporting data sources can be found in the methodology chapter of the monitor. Changes from previous year No changes from 2022 23.  34 Corporate Plan 2023 24 Performance measure Target 2023 24 to 2026 27 12. Number of third party accreditations maintained to ensure National Measurement Institute measurement services meet national and international best practice Effectiveness Maintain global acceptance of over 300 measurement capabilities under the Mutual Recognition Arrangement of the International Committee of Weights and Measures NMI s 25 National Association of Testing Authorities NATA accreditations across calibration and testing, reference material production, and proficiency testing functions World Anti Doping Agency WADA accreditation for NMI s sports drug testing capability. Why this matters Australia is a trade oriented economy. A trusted measurement system reduces technical barriers to trade, helps Australian businesses engage in international and domestic markets, and maintains Australia s standing with our trading partners. Our measurement system also underpins effective regulation of health, safety and the environment enables advanced industrial production and manufacturing supports the management of critical infrastructure, including for energy supply and drives innovation and research. Data source Data for the specific sub measures is maintained and reported through National Measurement Institute internal databases the international key comparison database maintained by the International Bureau of Weights and Measures the National Association of Testing Authorities the World Anti Doping Agency. Methodology Data is maintained on internal National Measurement Institute databases for each of the 3 sub measures. Each quarter these can be extracted and compared with the target numbers. Changes from previous year No changes from 2022 23. Department s regulatory functions This performance measure relates to the activities of the National Measurement Institute.  35 Corporate Plan 2023 24 Activity 1.3 supporting a strong resources sector This activity aims to support the sustainable development of the resources sector, attract private sector investment and encourage innovative technologies. It relates to PBS 2023 24 Outcome 1, Programs 1.3 and 1.4.1 Performance measure Target 2023 24 to 2026 27 13. Grow Australia s critical minerals sector, including by supporting development of downstream processing capacity Output Year on year increase in the number, progress and total capital expenditure of critical minerals projects Why this matters Australia has significant reserves of critical minerals, and the potential to process them, which are vital to the economic security of global economies. Markets for these minerals and processed products are characterised by concentrated global supply chains, leading to price and supply risk for sectors like defence, transport, energy generation and telecommunications. Growing the critical minerals sector in Australia will deliver economic benefits for Australians, including through increased trade and job creation. This will also contribute to diversifying global supply chains and position Australia as an ethical, reliable and secure supplier of critical minerals. While the department s performance is the focus of this measure, there are factors outside of the department s control, such as market movements, that contribute to performance against the target. Data source The department s annual Resources and energy major projects report. Methodology The data is calculated by comparison of number, stage and investment in mining and processing operations from current year and previous year e.g. X lithium mining operations in 2023, subtracted from X lithium mining operations in 2022 positive or negative result indicating growth or lack of growth, and with commentary noting the likely impact of market dynamics . Changes from previous year No changes from 2022 23. 1 There is no performance information in relation to PBS 2023 24 Outcome 1, Program 1.4 Nuclear Powered Submarine Program, noting the department has only a limited supporting role.   36 Corporate Plan 2023 24 Performance measure Target 2023 24 to 2026 27 14. Increase opportunities for resources project investment Output At least one release of acreage or award of titles for offshore resources oil and gas exploration or greenhouse gas storage exploration per year Why this matters The release of offshore acreage and award of new titles for petroleum and greenhouse gas storage exploration helps to secure ongoing new investment in the resources sector, ensuring future energy supply and enabling the abatement of carbon emissions. Data source Specific releases are published online via the department s website and data held in the Acreage release bidding statistics report. Award of titles data is held by the National Offshore Petroleum Titles Administrator s National Electronic Approvals Tracking System. Specific areas and awards are published online via the department s website. Additional sources include Australian Government Gazette notices and ministerial media releases announcing the outcomes of the acreage release process where relevant . Methodology Reporting on the number of releases and award of titles from the relevant financial year. Changes from previous year No changes from 2022 23. Performance measure Target 2023 24 to 2026 27 15. The National Offshore Petroleum Titles Administrator NOPTA published assessment timeframes for applications made under the Offshore Petroleum and Greenhouse Gas Storage Act 2006 OPGGS Act are met Efficiency Timeframes are met 90 of the time Why this matters Efficient processing of applications supports a strong offshore resources sector by creating business certainty and reducing project timelines. Data source NOPTA s National Electronic Approvals Tracking System and the department s records. Methodology The performance calculation is automated by a reporting tool within an internal database. It calculates the percentage of applications that have met the assessment timeframes timeframes under the OPGGS Act are hardcoded in the database . Changes from previous year No changes from 2022 23. Department s regulatory functions This performance measure relates to the activities of NOPTA. Removed performance measure for activity 1.3 Performance measure Reason for removal Safe and effective administration and operation of Australia s offshore oil, gas and greenhouse gas industry The department s review of the safety regime of the oil and gas sector was completed in 2022 23.   37 Corporate Plan 2023 24 Creative Commons Commonwealth of Australia 2023 Ownership of intellectual property rights Unless otherwise noted, copyright and any other intellectual property rights, if any in this publication is owned by the Commonwealth of Australia. Creative Commons licence Attribution CC BY 4.0 All material in this publication is licensed under a Creative Commons Attribution 4.0 International Licence, save for content supplied by third parties, logos, any material protected by trademark or otherwise noted in this publication, and the Commonwealth Coat of Arms. These are forms of property which the Commonwealth cannot or usually would not license others to use. Creative Commons Attribution 4.0 International Licence is a standard form licence agreement that allows you to copy, distribute, transmit and adapt this publication provided you attribute the work. A summary of the licence terms is available from The full licence terms are available from Content contained herein should be attributed as Commonwealth of Australia Department of Industry, Science and Resources, Department of Industry, Science and Resources Corporate Plan 2023 24, August 2023.   industry.gov.au corporateplan 