17.7.2000 EN L 178 1 Official Journal of the European Communities I Acts whose publication is obligatory DIRECTIVE 2000 31 EC OF THE EUROPEAN PARLIAMENT AND OF THE COUNCIL of 8 June 2000 on certain legal aspects of information society services, in particular electronic commerce, in the Internal Market Directive on electronic commerce THE EUROPEAN PARLIAMENT AND THE COUNCIL OF THE 3 Community law and the characteristics of the Community legal order are a vital asset to enable European citizens and EUROPEAN UNION, operators to take full advantage, without consideration of borders, of the opportunities afforded by electronic Having regard to the Treaty establishing the European Com commerce this Directive therefore has the purpose of munity, and in particular Articles 47 2 , 55 and 95 thereof, ensuring a high level of Community legal integration in order to establish a real area without internal borders for Having regard to the proposal from the Commission 1 , information society services. Having regard to the opinion of the Economic and Social Committee 2 , Acting in accordance with the procedure laid down in 4 It is important to ensure that electronic commerce could Article 251 of the Treaty 3 , fully benefit from the internal market and therefore that, as with Council Directive 89 552 EEC of 3 October 1989 on the coordination of certain provisions laid down by Whereas law, regulation or administrative action in Member States concerning the pursuit of television broadcasting 1 The European Union is seeking to forge ever closer links activities 4 , a high level of Community integration is between the States and peoples of Europe, to ensure achieved. economic and social progress in accordance with Article 14 2 of the Treaty, the internal market comprises an area without internal frontiers in which the free movements of goods, services and the freedom of estab lishment are ensured the development of information 5 The development of information society services within society services within the area without internal frontiers the Community is hampered by a number of legal is vital to eliminating the barriers which divide the obstacles to the proper functioning of the internal market European peoples. which make less attractive the exercise of the freedom of establishment and the freedom to provide services these 2 The development of electronic commerce within the obstacles arise from divergences in legislation and from information society offers significant employment oppor the legal uncertainty as to which national rules apply tunities in the Community, particularly in small and to such services in the absence of coordination and medium sized enterprises, and will stimulate economic adjustment of legislation in the relevant areas, obstacles growth and investment in innovation by European com might be justified in the light of the case law of the Court panies, and can also enhance the competitiveness of of Justice of the European Communities legal uncertainty European industry, provided that everyone has access to exists with regard to the extent to which Member States the Internet. may control services originating from another Member State. 1 OJ C 30, 5.2.1999, p. 4. 2 OJ C 169, 16.6.1999, p. 36. 3 Opinion of the European Parliament of 6 May 1999 OJ C 279, 1.10.1999, p. 389 , Council common position of 28 February 2000 OJ C 128, 8.5.2000, p. 32 and Decision of the European 4 OJ L 298, 17.10.1989, p. 23. Directive as amended by Directive 97 36 EC of the European Parliament and of the Council OJ Parliament of 4 May 2000 not yet published in the Official Journal . L 202, 30.7.1997, p. 60 .  L 178 2 EN 17.7.2000 Official Journal of the European Communities 6 In the light of Community objectives, of Articles 43 and unfair terms in consumer contracts 1 and Directive 97 7 EC of the European Parliament and of the Council 49 of the Treaty and of secondary Community law, these obstacles should be eliminated by coordinating certain of 20 May 1997 on the protection of consumers in respect of distance contracts 2 form a vital element national laws and by clarifying certain legal concepts at Community level to the extent necessary for the proper for protecting consumers in contractual matters those Directives also apply in their entirety to information functioning of the internal market by dealing only with certain specific matters which give rise to problems for society services that same Community acquis, which is fully applicable to information society services, also the internal market, this Directive is fully consistent with the need to respect the principle of subsidiarity as set out embraces in particular Council Directive 84 450 EEC of 10 September 1984 concerning misleading and compara in Article 5 of the Treaty. tive advertising 3 , Council Directive 87 102 EEC of 22 December 1986 for the approximation of the laws, regulations and administrative provisions of the Member States concerning consumer credit 4 , Council Directive 7 In order to ensure legal certainty and consumer confi 93 22 EEC of 10 May 1993 on investment services in dence, this Directive must lay down a clear and general the securities field 5 , Council Directive 90 314 EEC of framework to cover certain legal aspects of electronic 13 June 1990 on package travel, package holidays and commerce in the internal market. package tours 6 , Directive 98 6 EC of the European Parliament and of the Council of 16 February 1998 on consumer production in the indication of prices of products offered to consumers 7 , Council Directive 8 The objective of this Directive is to create a legal 92 59 EEC of 29 June 1992 on general product safety 8 , framework to ensure the free movement of information Directive 94 47 EC of the European Parliament and of society services between Member States and not to the Council of 26 October 1994 on the protection of harmonise the field of criminal law as such. purchasers in respect of certain aspects on contracts relating to the purchase of the right to use immovable properties on a timeshare basis 9 , Directive 98 27 EC of the European Parliament and of the Council of 19 May 9 The free movement of information society services can in 1998 on injunctions for the protection of consumers many cases be a specific reflection in Community law of interests 10 , Council Directive 85 374 EEC of 25 July a more general principle, namely freedom of expression 1985 on the approximation of the laws, regulations as enshrined in Article 10 1 of the Convention for the and administrative provisions concerning liability for Protection of Human Rights and Fundamental Freedoms, defective products 11 , Directive 1999 44 EC of the Euro which has been ratified by all the Member States for this pean Parliament and of the Council of 25 May 1999 on reason, directives covering the supply of information certain aspects of the sale of consumer goods and society services must ensure that this activity may be associated guarantees 12 , the future Directive of the engaged in freely in the light of that Article, subject only European Parliament and of the Council concerning the to the restrictions laid down in paragraph 2 of that Article distance marketing of consumer financial services and and in Article 46 1 of the Treaty this Directive is Council Directive 92 28 EEC of 31 March 1992 on not intended to affect national fundamental rules and the advertising of medicinal products 13 this Directive principles relating to freedom of expression. 10 In accordance with the principle of proportionality, the measures provided for in this Directive are strictly limited 1 OJ L 95, 21.4.1993, p. 29. to the minimum needed to achieve the objective of the 2 OJ L 144, 4.6.1999, p. 19. 3 OJ L 250, 19.9.1984, p. 17. Directive as amended by Directive proper functioning of the internal market where action 97 55 EC of the European Parliament and of the Council OJ at Community level is necessary, and in order to guarantee L 290, 23.10.1997, p. 18 . an area which is truly without internal frontiers as far as 4 OJ L 42, 12.2.1987, p. 48. Directive as last amended by Directive electronic commerce is concerned, the Directive must 98 7 EC of the European Parliament and of the Council OJ L 101, ensure a high level of protection of objectives of general 1.4.1998, p. 17 . interest, in particular the protection of minors and human 5 OJ L 141, 11.6.1993, p. 27. Directive as last amended by Directive dignity, consumer protection and the protection of 97 9 EC of the European Parliament and of the Council OJ L 84, public health according to Article 152 of the Treaty, the 26.3.1997, p. 22 . protection of public health is an essential component of 6 OJ L 158, 23.6.1990, p. 59. other Community policies. 7 OJ L 80, 18.3.1998, p. 27. 8 OJ L 228, 11.8.1992, p. 24. 9 OJ L 280, 29.10.1994, p. 83. 10 OJ L 166, 11.6.1998, p. 51. Directive as amended by Directive 1999 44 EC OJ L 171, 7.7.1999, p. 12 . 11 This Directive is without prejudice to the level of 11 OJ L 210, 7.8.1985, p. 29. Directive as amended by Directive protection for, in particular, public health and consumer 1999 34 EC OJ L 141, 4.6.1999, p. 20 . interests, as established by Community acts amongst 12 OJ L 171, 7.7.1999, p. 12. 13 OJ L 113, 30.4.1992, p. 13. others, Council Directive 93 13 EEC of 5 April 1993 on  17.7.2000 EN L 178 3 Official Journal of the European Communities should be without prejudice to Directive 98 43 EC of the 16 The exclusion of gambling activities from the scope of application of this Directive covers only games of chance, European Parliament and of the Council of 6 July 1998 on the approximation of the laws, regulations and lotteries and betting transactions, which involve wagering a stake with monetary value this does not cover pro administrative provisions of the Member States relating to the advertising and sponsorship of tobacco products 1 motional competitions or games where the purpose is to encourage the sale of goods or services and where adopted within the framework of the internal market, or to directives on the protection of public health this payments, if they arise, serve only to acquire the promoted goods or services. Directive complements information requirements estab lished by the abovementioned Directives and in particular Directive 97 7 EC. 17 The definition of information society services already exists in Community law in Directive 98 34 EC of the 12 It is necessary to exclude certain activities from the scope European Parliament and of the Council of 22 June 1998 of this Directive, on the grounds that the freedom to laying down a procedure for the provision of information provide services in these fields cannot, at this stage, in the field of technical standards and regulations and of be guaranteed under the Treaty or existing secondary rules on information society services 4 and in Directive legislation excluding these activities does not preclude 98 84 EC of the European Parliament and of the Council any instruments which might prove necessary for the of 20 November 1998 on the legal protection of services proper functioning of the internal market taxation, based on, or consisting of, conditional access 5 this particularly value added tax imposed on a large number definition covers any service normally provided for of the services covered by this Directive, must be excluded remuneration, at a distance, by means of electronic form the scope of this Directive. equipment for the processing including digital com pression and storage of data, and at the individual request of a recipient of a service those services referred to in the 13 This Directive does not aim to establish rules on fiscal indicative list in Annex V to Directive 98 34 EC which obligations nor does it pre empt the drawing up of do not imply data processing and storage are not covered Community instruments concerning fiscal aspects of by this definition. electronic commerce. 14 The protection of individuals with regard to the pro 18 Information society services span a wide range of econ cessing of personal data is solely governed by Directive omic activities which take place on line these activities 95 46 EC of the European Parliament and of the Council can, in particular, consist of selling goods on line activi of 24 October 1995 on the protection of individuals with ties such as the delivery of goods as such or the provision regard to the processing of personal data and on the free of services off line are not covered information society movement of such data 2 and Directive 97 66 EC of the services are not solely restricted to services giving rise to European Parliament and of the Council of 15 December on line contracting but also, in so far as they represent an 1997 concerning the processing of personal data and the economic activity, extend to services which are not protection of privacy in the telecommunications sector 3 remunerated by those who receive them, such as those which are fully applicable to information society services offering on line information or commercial communi these Directives already establish a Community legal cations, or those providing tools allowing for search, framework in the field of personal data and therefore it is access and retrieval of data information society services not necessary to cover this issue in this Directive in order also include services consisting of the transmission of to ensure the smooth functioning of the internal market, information via a communication network, in providing in particular the free movement of personal data between access to a communication network or in hosting infor Member States the implementation and application of mation provided by a recipient of the service television this Directive should be made in full compliance with the broadcasting within the meaning of Directive principles relating to the protection of personal data, in EEC 89 552 and radio broadcasting are not information particular as regards unsolicited commercial communi society services because they are not provided at individ cation and the liability of intermediaries this Directive ual request by contrast, services which are transmitted cannot prevent the anonymous use of open networks point to point, such as video on demand or the provision such as the Internet. of commercial communications by electronic mail are information society services the use of electronic mail or equivalent individual communications for instance by 15 The confidentiality of communications is guaranteed by natural persons acting outside their trade, business or Article 5 Directive 97 66 EC in accordance with that profession including their use for the conclusion of Directive, Member States must prohibit any kind of contracts between such persons is not an information interception or surveillance of such communications by society service the contractual relationship between an others than the senders and receivers, except when legally authorised. 4 OJ L 204, 21.7.1998, p. 37. Directive as amended by Directive 1 OJ L 213, 30.7.1998, p. 9. 2 OJ L 281, 23.11.1995, p. 31. 98 48 EC OJ L 217, 5.8.1998, p. 18 . 5 OJ L 320, 28.11.1998, p. 54. 3 OJ L 24, 30.1.1998, p. 1.  L 178 4 EN 17.7.2000 Official Journal of the European Communities employee and his employer is not an information society improve mutual trust between Member States, it is essential to state clearly this responsibility on the part of service activities which by their very nature cannot be carried out at a distance and by electronic means, such as the Member State where the services originate moreover, in order to effectively guarantee freedom to provide the statutory auditing of company accounts or medical advice requiring the physical examination of a patient are services and legal certainty for suppliers and recipients of services, such information society services should in not information society services. principle be subject to the law of the Member State in which the service provider is established. 19 The place at which a service provider is established should be determined in conformity with the case law of the Court of Justice according to which the concept of 23 This Directive neither aims to establish additional rules establishment involves the actual pursuit of an economic on private international law relating to conflicts of law activity through a fixed establishment for an indefinite nor does it deal with the jurisdiction of Courts provisions period this requirement is also fulfilled where a company of the applicable law designated by rules of private is constituted for a given period the place of establish international law must not restrict the freedom to provide ment of a company providing services via an Internet information society services as established in this Direc website is not the place at which the technology support tive. ing its website is located or the place at which its website is accessible but the place where it pursues its economic activity in cases where a provider has several places of establishment it is important to determine from which place of establishment the service concerned is provided 24 In the context of this Directive, notwithstanding the rule in cases where it is difficult to determine from which of on the control at source of information society services, several places of establishment a given service is provided, it is legitimate under the conditions established in this this is the place where the provider has the centre of his Directive for Member States to take measures to restrict activities relating to this particular service. the free movement of information society services. 20 The definition of recipient of a service covers all types of usage of information society services, both by persons 25 National courts, including civil courts, dealing with who provide information on open networks such as the private law disputes can take measures to derogate from Internet and by persons who seek information on the the freedom to provide information society services in Internet for private or professional reasons. conformity with conditions established in this Directive. 21 The scope of the coordinated field is without prejudice to 26 Member States, in conformity with conditions established future Community harmonisation relating to information in this Directive, may apply their national rules on society services and to future legislation adopted at criminal law and criminal proceedings with a view to national level in accordance with Community law the taking all investigative and other measures necessary for coordinated field covers only requirements relating to the detection and prosecution of criminal offences, on line activities such as on line information, on line without there being a need to notify such measures to the advertising, on line shopping, on line contracting and Commission. does not concern Member States legal requirements relating to goods such as safety standards, labelling obligations, or liability for goods, or Member States requirements relating to the delivery or the transport of goods, including the distribution of medicinal products 27 This Directive, together with the future Directive of the the coordinated field does not cover the exercise of rights European Parliament and of the Council concerning of pre emption by public authorities concerning certain the distance marketing of consumer financial services, goods such as works of art. contributes to the creating of a legal framework for the on line provision of financial services this Directive does not pre empt future initiatives in the area of financial services in particular with regard to the harmonisation of rules of conduct in this field the possibility for Member 22 Information society services should be supervised at the source of the activity, in order to ensure an effective States, established in this Directive, under certain circum stances of restricting the freedom to provide information protection of public interest objectives to that end, it is necessary to ensure that the competent authority provides society services in order to protect consumers also covers measures in the area of financial services in particular such protection not only for the citizens of its own country but for all Community citizens in order to measures aiming at protecting investors.  17.7.2000 EN L 178 5 Official Journal of the European Communities 28 The Member States obligation not to subject access to 32 In order to remove barriers to the development of cross border services within the Community which members the activity of an information society service provider to prior authorisation does not concern postal services of the regulated professions might offer on the Internet, it is necessary that compliance be guaranteed at Community covered by Directive 97 67 EC of the European Parlia ment and of the Council of 15 December 1997 on level with professional rules aiming, in particular, to protect consumers or public health codes of conduct at common rules for the development of the internal market of Community postal services and the improvement of Community level would be the best means of determining the rules on professional ethics applicable to commercial quality of service 1 consisting of the physical delivery of a printed electronic mail message and does not affect communication the drawing up or, where appropriate, the adaptation of such rules should be encouraged voluntary accreditation systems, in particular for pro viders of electronic signature certification service. without prejudice to the autonomy of professional bodies and associations. 33 This Directive complements Community law and national 29 Commercial communications are essential for the finan law relating to regulated professions maintaining a coher cing of information society services and for developing a ent set of applicable rules in this field. wide variety of new, charge free services in the interests of consumer protection and fair trading, commercial communications, including discounts, promotional offers 34 Each Member State is to amend its legislation containing and promotional competitions or games, must meet a requirements, and in particular requirements as to form, number of transparency requirements these requirements which are likely to curb the use of contracts by electronic are without prejudice to Directive 97 7 EC this Directive means the examination of the legislation requiring such should not affect existing Directives on commercial adjustment should be systematic and should cover all the communications, in particular Directive 98 43 EC. necessary stages and acts of the contractual process, including the filing of the contract the result of this amendment should be to make contracts concluded electronically workable the legal effect of electronic signatures is dealt with by Directive 1999 93 EC of the 30 The sending of unsolicited commercial communications European Parliament and of the Council of 13 December by electronic mail may be undesirable for consumers and 1999 on a Community framework for electronic signa information society service providers and may disrupt tures 2 the acknowledgement of receipt by a service the smooth functioning of interactive networks the provider may take the form of the on line provision of question of consent by recipient of certain forms of the service paid for. unsolicited commercial communications is not addressed by this Directive, but has already been addressed, in particular, by Directive 97 7 EC and by Directive 35 This Directive does not affect Member States possibility 97 66 EC in Member States which authorise unsolicited of maintaining or establishing general or specific legal commercial communications by electronic mail, the requirements for contracts which can be fulfilled by setting up of appropriate industry filtering initiatives electronic means, in particular requirements concerning should be encouraged and facilitated in addition it is secure electronic signatures. necessary that in any event unsolicited commercial communities are clearly identifiable as such in order to improve transparency and to facilitate the functioning of such industry initiatives unsolicited commercial com 36 Member States may maintain restrictions for the use of munications by electronic mail should not result in electronic contracts with regard to contracts requiring by additional communication costs for the recipient. law the involvement of courts, public authorities, or professions exercising public authority this possibility also covers contracts which require the involvement of courts, public authorities, or professions exercising public authority in order to have an effect with regard to third 31 Member States which allow the sending of unsolicited parties as well as contracts requiring by law certification commercial communications by electronic mail without or attestation by a notary. prior consent of the recipient by service providers established in their territory have to ensure that the service providers consult regularly and respect the opt 37 Member States obligation to remove obstacles to the use out registers in which natural persons not wishing to of electronic contracts concerns only obstacles resulting receive such commercial communications can register from legal requirements and not practical obstacles themselves. resulting from the impossibility of using electronic means in certain cases. 1 OJ L 15, 21.1.1998, p. 14. 2 OJ L 13, 19.1.2000, p. 12.  L 178 6 EN 17.7.2000 Official Journal of the European Communities 38 Member States obligation to remove obstacles to the use 43 A service provider can benefit from the exemptions for mere conduit and for caching when he is in no way of electronic contracts is to be implemented in conformity with legal requirements for contracts enshrined in Com involved with the information transmitted this requires among other things that he does not modify the infor munity law. mation that he transmits this requirement does not cover manipulations of a technical nature which take place in the course of the transmission as they do not alter the integrity of the information contained in the transmission. 39 The exceptions to the provisions concerning the contracts concluded exclusively by electronic mail or by equivalent individual communications provided for by this Directive, 44 A service provider who deliberately collaborates with one in relation to information to be provided and the placing of the recipients of his service in order to undertake illegal of orders, should not enable, as a result, the by passing of acts goes beyond the activities of mere conduit or those provisions by providers of information society caching and as a result cannot benefit from the liability services. exemptions established for these activities. 45 The limitations of the liability of intermediary service providers established in this Directive do not affect 40 Both existing and emerging disparities in Member States the possibility of injunctions of different kinds such legislation and case law concerning liability of service injunctions can in particular consist of orders by courts providers acting as intermediaries prevent the smooth or administrative authorities requiring the termination or functioning of the internal market, in particular by prevention of any infringement, including the removal of impairing the development of cross border services and illegal information or the disabling of access to it. producing distortions of competition service providers have a duty to act, under certain circumstances, with a view to preventing or stopping illegal activities this Directive should constitute the appropriate basis for 46 In order to benefit from a limitation of liability, the the development of rapid and reliable procedures for provider of an information society service, consisting removing and disabling access to illegal information such of the storage of information, upon obtaining actual mechanisms could be developed on the basis of voluntary knowledge or awareness of illegal activities has to act agreements between all parties concerned and should be expeditiously to remove or to disable access to the encouraged by Member States it is in the interest of all information concerned the removal or disabling of access parties involved in the provision of information society has to be undertaken in the observance of the principle services to adopt and implement such procedures the of freedom of expression and of procedures established provisions of this Directive relating to liability should not for this purpose at national level this Directive does not preclude the development and effective operation, by affect Member States possibility of establishing specific the different interested parties, of technical systems of requirements which must be fulfilled expeditiously prior protection and identification and of technical surveillance to the removal or disabling of information. instruments made possible by digital technology within the limits laid down by Directives 95 46 EC and 97 66 EC. 47 Member States are prevented from imposing a monitoring obligation on service providers only with respect to obligations of a general nature this does not concern monitoring obligations in a specific case and, in particu lar, does not affect orders by national authorities in 41 This Directive strikes a balance between the different accordance with national legislation. interests at stake and establishes principles upon which industry agreements and standards can be based. 48 This Directive does not affect the possibility for Member States of requiring service providers, who host infor mation provided by recipients of their service, to apply 42 The exemptions from liability established in this Directive duties of care, which can reasonably be expected from cover only cases where the activity of the information them and which are specified by national law, in order to society service provider is limited to the technical process detect and prevent certain types of illegal activities. of operating and giving access to a communication network over which information made available by third parties is transmitted or temporarily stored, for the sole purpose of making the transmission more efficient this 49 Member States and the Commission are to encourage the drawing up of codes of conduct this is not to impair the activity is of a mere technical, automatic and passive nature, which implies that the information society service voluntary nature of such codes and the possibility for interested parties of deciding freely whether to adhere to provider has neither knowledge of nor control over the information which is transmitted or stored. such codes.  17.7.2000 EN L 178 7 Official Journal of the European Communities 50 It is important that the proposed directive on the 56 As regards the derogation contained in this Directive regarding contractual obligations concerning contracts harmonisation of certain aspects of copyright and related rights in the information society and this Directive come concluded by consumers, those obligations should be interpreted as including information on the essential into force within a similar time scale with a view to establishing a clear framework of rules relevant to the elements of the content of the contract, including con sumer rights, which have a determining influence on the issue of liability of intermediaries for copyright and relating rights infringements at Community level. decision to contract. 57 The Court of Justice has consistently held that a Member 51 Each Member State should be required, where necessary, State retains the right to take measures against a service to amend any legislation which is liable to hamper the provider that is established in another Member State but use of schemes for the out of court settlement of disputes directs all or most of his activity to the territory of the through electronic channels the result of this amendment first Member State if the choice of establishment was must be to make the functioning of such schemes made with a view to evading the legislation that would genuinely and effectively possible in law and in practice, have applied to the provider had he been established on even across borders. the territory of the first Member State. 58 This Directive should not apply to services supplied by 52 The effective exercise of the freedoms of the internal service providers established in a third country in view market makes it necessary to guarantee victims effective of the global dimension of electronic commerce, it is, access to means of settling disputes damage which may however, appropriate to ensure that the Community rules arise in connection with information society services is are consistent with international rules this Directive is characterised both by its rapidity and by its geographical without prejudice to the results of discussions within extent in view of this specific character and the need to international organisations amongst others WTO, ensure that national authorities do not endanger the OECD, Uncitral on legal issues. mutual confidence which they should have in one another, this Directive requests Member States to ensure that appropriate court actions are available Member States should examine the need to provide access to 59 Despite the global nature of electronic communications, judicial procedures by appropriate electronic means. coordination of national regulatory measures at European Union level is necessary in order to avoid fragmentation of the internal market, and for the establishment of an appropriate European regulatory framework such coordination should also contribute to the establishment 53 Directive 98 27 EC, which is applicable to information of a common and strong negotiating position in inter society services, provides a mechanism relating to actions national forums. for an injunction aimed at the protection of the collective interests of consumers this mechanism will contribute to the free movement of information society services by ensuring a high level of consumer protection. 60 In order to allow the unhampered development of electronic commerce, the legal framework must be clear and simple, predictable and consistent with the rules applicable at international level so that it does not adversely affect the competitiveness of European industry 54 The sanctions provided for under this Directive are or impede innovation in that sector. without prejudice to any other sanction or remedy provided under national law Member States are not obliged to provide criminal sanctions for infringement of national provisions adopted pursuant to this Directive. 61 If the market is actually to operate by electronic means in the context of globalisation, the European Union and the major non European areas need to consult each other with a view to making laws and procedures compatible. 55 This Directive does not affect the law applicable to contractual obligations relating to consumer contracts accordingly, this Directive cannot have the result of depriving the consumer of the protection afforded to him 62 Cooperation with third countries should be strengthened in the area of electronic commerce, in particular with by the mandatory rules relating to contractual obligations of the law of the Member State in which he has his applicant countries, the developing countries and the European Union s other trading partners. habitual residence.  L 178 8 EN 17.7.2000 Official Journal of the European Communities 63 The adoption of this Directive will not prevent the commercial communications, electronic contracts, the liability of intermediaries, codes of conduct, out of court dispute Member States from taking into account the various social, societal and cultural implications which are settlements, court actions and cooperation between Member States. inherent in the advent of the information society in particular it should not hinder measures which Member States might adopt in conformity with Community law to achieve social, cultural and democratic goals taking 3. This Directive complements Community law applicable into account their linguistic diversity, national and to information society services without prejudice to the level regional specificities as well as their cultural heritage, and of protection for, in particular, public health and consumer to ensure and maintain public access to the widest interests, as established by Community acts and national possible range of information society services in any legislation implementing them in so far as this does not restrict case, the development of the information society is to the freedom to provide information society services. ensure that Community citizens can have access to the cultural European heritage provided in the digital environment. 4. This Directive does not establish additional rules on private international law nor does it deal with the jurisdiction of Courts. 64 Electronic communication offers the Member States an excellent means of providing public services in the cultural, educational and linguistic fields. 5. This Directive shall not apply to a the field of taxation 65 The Council, in its resolution of 19 January 1999 on the consumer dimension of the information society 1 , b questions relating to information society services covered stressed that the protection of consumers deserved special by Directives 95 46 EC and 97 66 EC attention in this field the Commission will examine the degree to which existing consumer protection rules provide insufficient protection in the context of the c questions relating to agreements or practices governed by information society and will identify, where necessary, cartel law the deficiencies of this legislation and those issues which could require additional measures if need be, the Com d the following activities of information society services mission should make specific additional proposals to resolve such deficiencies that will thereby have been the activities of notaries or equivalent professions to identified, the extent that they involve a direct and specific connection with the exercise of public authority, HAVE ADOPTED THIS DIRECTIVE the representation of a client and defence of his interests before the courts, CHAPTER I gambling activities which involve wagering a stake with monetary value in games of chance, including lotteries and betting transactions. GENERAL PROVISIONS 6. This Directive does not affect measures taken at Com Article 1 munity or national level, in the respect of Community law, in order to promote cultural and linguistic diversity and to ensure the defence of pluralism. Objective and scope 1. This Directive seeks to contribute to the proper func Article 2 tioning of the internal market by ensuring the free movement of information society services between the Member States. Definitions 2. This Directive approximates, to the extent necessary for For the purpose of this Directive, the following terms shall the achievement of the objective set out in paragraph 1, certain bear the following meanings national provisions on information society services relating to the internal market, the establishment of service providers, a information society services services within the meaning of Article 1 2 of Directive 98 34 EC as amended by Directive 98 48 EC 1 OJ C 23, 28.1.1999, p. 1.  17.7.2000 EN L 178 9 Official Journal of the European Communities b service provider any natural or legal person providing an the taking up of the activity of an information society service, such as requirements concerning information society service qualifications, authorisation or notification, c established service provider a service provider who the pursuit of the activity of an information society effectively pursues an economic activity using a fixed service, such as requirements concerning the establishment for an indefinite period. The presence and behaviour of the service provider, requirements use of the technical means and technologies required to regarding the quality or content of the service provide the service do not, in themselves, constitute an including those applicable to advertising and con establishment of the provider tracts, or requirements concerning the liability of the service provider d recipient of the service any natural or legal person who, ii The coordinated field does not cover requirements for professional ends or otherwise, uses an information such as society service, in particular for the purposes of seeking information or making it accessible requirements applicable to goods as such, e consumer any natural person who is acting for purposes requirements applicable to the delivery of goods, which are outside his or her trade, business or profession requirements applicable to services not provided by electronic means. f commercial communication any form of communication designed to promote, directly or indirectly, the goods, services or image of a company, organisation or person pursuing a commercial, industrial or craft activity or Article 3 exercising a regulated profession. The following do not in themselves constitute commercial communications Internal market information allowing direct access to the activity of the company, organisation or person, in particular a 1. Each Member State shall ensure that the information domain name or an electronic mail address, society services provided by a service provider established on its territory comply with the national provisions applicable in the Member State in question which fall within the coordinated communications relating to the goods, services or field. image of the company, organisation or person com piled in an independent manner, particularly when this is without financial consideration 2. Member States may not, for reasons falling within the coordinated field, restrict the freedom to provide information g regulated profession any profession within the meaning society services from another Member State. of either Article 1 d of Council Directive 89 48 EEC of 21 December 1988 on a general system for the recognition of higher education diplomas awarded on completion of 3. Paragraphs 1 and 2 shall not apply to the fields referred professional education and training of at least three years to in the Annex. duration 1 or of Article 1 f of Council Directi ve 92 51 EEC of 18 June 1992 on a second general system for the recognition of professional education and training 4. Member States may take measures to derogate from to supplement Directive 89 48 EEC 2 paragraph 2 in respect of a given information society service if the following conditions are fulfilled h coordinated field requirements laid down in Member States legal systems applicable to information society a the measures shall be service providers or information society services, regardless of whether they are of a general nature or specifically i necessary for one of the following reasons designed for them. public policy, in particular the prevention, investi i The coordinated field concerns requirements with gation, detection and prosecution of criminal which the service provider has to comply in respect of offences, including the protection of minors and the fight against any incitement to hatred on grounds of race, sex, religion or nationality, and violations of human dignity concerning individual persons, 1 OJ L 19, 24.1.1989, p. 16. 2 OJ L 209, 24.7.1992, p. 25. Directive as last amended by Commission Directive 97 38 EC OJ L 184, 12.7.1997, p. 31 . the protection of public health,  L 178 10 EN 17.7.2000 Official Journal of the European Communities public security, including the safeguarding of 2. Paragraph 1 shall be without prejudice to authorisation schemes which are not specifically and exclusively targeted national security and defence, at information society services, or which are covered by the protection of consumers, including investors Directive 97 13 EC of the European Parliament and of the Council of 10 April 1997 on a common framework for ii taken against a given information society service which general authorisations and individual licences in the field of prejudices the objectives referred to in point i or telecommunications services 1 . which presents a serious and grave risk of prejudice to those objectives Article 5 iii proportionate to those objectives b before taking the measures in question and without General information to be provided prejudice to court proceedings, including preliminary proceedings and acts carried out in the framework of a criminal investigation, the Member State has 1. In addition to other information requirements estab lished by Community law, Member States shall ensure that the asked the Member State referred to in paragraph 1 to service provider shall render easily, directly and permanently take measures and the latter did not take such accessible to the recipients of the service and competent measures, or they were inadequate, authorities, at least the following information notified the Commission and the Member State referred a the name of the service provider to in paragraph 1 of its intention to take such measures. b the geographic address at which the service provider is established 5. Member States may, in the case of urgency, derogate from the conditions stipulated in paragraph 4 b . Where this c the details of the service provider, including his electronic is the case, the measures shall be notified in the shortest mail address, which allow him to be contacted rapidly and possible time to the Commission and to the Member State communicated with in a direct and effective manner referred to in paragraph 1, indicating the reasons for which the Member State considers that there is urgency. d where the service provider is registered in a trade or similar public register, the trade register in which the service 6. Without prejudice to the Member State s possibility of provider is entered and his registration number, or equiva proceeding with the measures in question, the Commission lent means of identification in that register shall examine the compatibility of the notified measures with Community law in the shortest possible time where it comes e where the activity is subject to an authorisation scheme, to the conclusion that the measure is incompatible with the particulars of the relevant supervisory authority Community law, the Commission shall ask the Member State in question to refrain from taking any proposed measures or f as concerns the regulated professions urgently to put an end to the measures in question. any professional body or similar institution with which the service provider is registered, CHAPTER II the professional title and the Member State where it has been granted, PRINCIPLES a reference to the applicable professional rules in the Member State of establishment and the means to access Section 1 Establishment and information requirements them g where the service provider undertakes an activity that is Article 4 subject to VAT, the identification number referred to in Article 22 1 of the sixth Council Directive 77 388 EEC of 17 May 1977 on the harmonisation of the laws of the Principle excluding prior authorisation Member States relating to turnover taxes Common system of value added tax uniform basis of assessment 2 . 1. Member States shall ensure that the taking up and pursuit of the activity of an information society service provider may 1 OJ L 117, 7.5.1997, p. 15. not be made subject to prior authorisation or any other 2 OJ L 145, 13.6.1977, p. 1. Directive as last amended by Directive 1999 85 EC OJ L 277, 28.10.1999, p. 34 . requirement having equivalent effect.  17.7.2000 EN L 178 11 Official Journal of the European Communities 2. In addition to other information requirements estab Article 8 lished by Community law, Member States shall at least ensure that, where information society services refer to prices, these are to be indicated clearly and unambiguously and, in particu Regulated professions lar, must indicate whether they are inclusive of tax and delivery costs. 1. Member States shall ensure that the use of commercial communications which are part of, or constitute, an infor mation society service provided by a member of a regulated Section 2 Commercial communications profession is permitted subject to compliance with the pro fessional rules regarding, in particular, the independence, dignity and honour of the profession, professional secrecy and fairness towards clients and other members of the profession. Article 6 Information to be provided 2. Without prejudice to the autonomy of professional bodies and associations, Member States and the Commission shall encourage professional associations and bodies to estab In addition to other information requirements established by lish codes of conduct at Community level in order to determine Community law, Member States shall ensure that commercial the types of information that can be given for the purposes of communications which are part of, or constitute, an infor commercial communication in conformity with the rules mation society service comply at least with the following referred to in paragraph 1 conditions a the commercial communication shall be clearly identifiable 3. When drawing up proposals for Community initiatives as such which may become necessary to ensure the proper functioning of the Internal Market with regard to the information referred b the natural or legal person on whose behalf the commercial to in paragraph 2, the Commission shall take due account of communication is made shall be clearly identifiable codes of conduct applicable at Community level and shall act in close cooperation with the relevant professional associations c promotional offers, such as discounts, premiums and gifts, and bodies. where permitted in the Member State where the service provider is established, shall be clearly identifiable as such, and the conditions which are to be met to qualify for them 4. This Directive shall apply in addition to Community shall be easily accessible and be presented clearly and Directives concerning access to, and the exercise of, activities unambiguously of the regulated professions. d promotional competitions or games, where permitted in the Member State where the service provider is established, shall be clearly identifiable as such, and the conditions for Section 3 Contracts concluded by electronic means participation shall be easily accessible and be presented clearly and unambiguously. Article 9 Article 7 Treatment of contracts Unsolicited commercial communication 1. Member States shall ensure that their legal system allows 1. In addition to other requirements established by Com contracts to be concluded by electronic means. Member States munity law, Member States which permit unsolicited commer shall in particular ensure that the legal requirements applicable cial communication by electronic mail shall ensure that such to the contractual process neither create obstacles for the use commercial communication by a service provider established of electronic contracts nor result in such contracts being in their territory shall be identifiable clearly and unambiguously deprived of legal effectiveness and validity on account of their as such as soon as it is received by the recipient. having been made by electronic means. 2. Without prejudice to Directive 97 7 EC and Direct 2. Member States may lay down that paragraph 1 shall not ive 97 66 EC, Member States shall take measures to ensure apply to all or certain contracts falling into one of the that service providers undertaking unsolicited commercial following categories communications by electronic mail consult regularly and respect the opt out registers in which natural persons not wishing to receive such commercial communications can a contracts that create or transfer rights in real estate, except for rental rights register themselves.  L 178 12 EN 17.7.2000 Official Journal of the European Communities b contracts requiring by law the involvement of courts, Article 11 public authorities or professions exercising public au thority Placing of the order c contracts of suretyship granted and on collateral securities furnished by persons acting for purposes outside their 1. Member States shall ensure, except when otherwise trade, business or profession agreed by parties who are not consumers, that in cases where the recipient of the service places his order through technological means, the following principles apply d contracts governed by family law or by the law of succession. the service provider has to acknowledge the receipt of the recipient s order without undue delay and by electronic means, 3. Member States shall indicate to the Commission the categories referred to in paragraph 2 to which they do the order and the acknowledgement of receipt are deemed not apply paragraph 1. Member States shall submit to the to be received when the parties to whom they are addressed Commission every five years a report on the application of are able to access them. paragraph 2 explaining the reasons why they consider it necessary to maintain the category referred to in para graph 2 b to which they do not apply paragraph 1. 2. Member States shall ensure that, except when otherwise agreed by parties who are not consumers, the service provider makes available to the recipient of the service appropriate, Article 10 effective and accessible technical means allowing him to identify and correct input errors, prior to the placing of the order. Information to be provided 3. Paragraph 1, first indent, and paragraph 2 shall not apply to contracts concluded exclusively by exchange of electronic 1. In addition to other information requirements estab mail or by equivalent individual communications. lished by Community law, Member States shall ensure, except when otherwise agreed by parties who are not consumers, that at least the following information is given by the service provider clearly, comprehensibly and unambiguously and Section 4 Liability of intermediary service providers prior to the order being placed by the recipient of the service a the different technical steps to follow to conclude the Article 12 contract b whether or not the concluded contract will be filed by the Mere conduit service provider and whether it will be accessible 1. Where an information society service is provided that c the technical means for identifying and correcting input consists of the transmission in a communication network of errors prior to the placing of the order information provided by a recipient of the service, or the provision of access to a communication network, Member d the languages offered for the conclusion of the contract. States shall ensure that the service provider is not liable for the information transmitted, on condition that the provider 2. Member States shall ensure that, except when otherwise a does not initiate the transmission agreed by parties who are not consumers, the service provider indicates any relevant codes of conduct to which he subscribes b does not select the receiver of the transmission and and information on how those codes can be consulted electronically. c does not select or modify the information contained in the transmission. 3. Contract terms and general conditions provided to the recipient must be made available in a way that allows him to 2. The acts of transmission and of provision of access store and reproduce them. referred to in paragraph 1 include the automatic, intermediate and transient storage of the information transmitted in so far as this takes place for the sole purpose of carrying out the transmission in the communication network, and provided 4. Paragraphs 1 and 2 shall not apply to contracts con cluded exclusively by exchange of electronic mail or by that the information is not stored for any period longer than is reasonably necessary for the transmission. equivalent individual communications.  17.7.2000 EN L 178 13 Official Journal of the European Communities 3. This Article shall not affect the possibility for a court or b the provider, upon obtaining such knowledge or aware ness, acts expeditiously to remove or to disable access to administrative authority, in accordance with Member States legal systems, of requiring the service provider to terminate or the information. prevent an infringement. 2. Paragraph 1 shall not apply when the recipient of the service is acting under the authority or the control of the Article 13 provider. Caching 3. This Article shall not affect the possibility for a court or administrative authority, in accordance with Member States 1. Where an information society service is provided that legal systems, of requiring the service provider to terminate or consists of the transmission in a communication network of prevent an infringement, nor does it affect the possibility for information provided by a recipient of the service, Member Member States of establishing procedures governing the States shall ensure that the service provider is not liable for removal or disabling of access to information. the automatic, intermediate and temporary storage of that information, performed for the sole purpose of making more efficient the information s onward transmission to other Article 15 recipients of the service upon their request, on condition that a the provider does not modify the information No general obligation to monitor b the provider complies with conditions on access to the 1. Member States shall not impose a general obligation on information providers, when providing the services covered by Articles 12, 13 and 14, to monitor the information which they transmit or c the provider complies with rules regarding the updating of store, nor a general obligation actively to seek facts or the information, specified in a manner widely recognised circumstances indicating illegal activity. and used by industry d the provider does not interfere with the lawful use of 2. Member States may establish obligations for information technology, widely recognised and used by industry, to society service providers promptly to inform the competent obtain data on the use of the information and public authorities of alleged illegal activities undertaken or information provided by recipients of their service or obli e the provider acts expeditiously to remove or to disable gations to communicate to the competent authorities, at their access to the information it has stored upon obtaining request, information enabling the identification of recipients actual knowledge of the fact that the information at the of their service with whom they have storage agreements. initial source of the transmission has been removed from the network, or access to it has been disabled, or that a court or an administrative authority has ordered such removal or disablement. CHAPTER III 2. This Article shall not affect the possibility for a court or IMPLEMENTATION administrative authority, in accordance with Member States legal systems, of requiring the service provider to terminate or prevent an infringement. Article 16 Article 14 Codes of conduct Hosting 1. Member States and the Commission shall encourage a the drawing up of codes of conduct at Community 1. Where an information society service is provided that level, by trade, professional and consumer associations consists of the storage of information provided by a recipient or organisations, designed to contribute to the proper of the service, Member States shall ensure that the service implementation of Articles 5 to 15 provider is not liable for the information stored at the request of a recipient of the service, on condition that b the voluntary transmission of draft codes of conduct at national or Community level to the Commission a the provider does not have actual knowledge of illegal activity or information and, as regards claims for damages, is not aware of facts or circumstances from which the c the accessibility of these codes of conduct in the Com munity languages by electronic means illegal activity or information is apparent or  L 178 14 EN 17.7.2000 Official Journal of the European Communities d the communication to the Member States and the Com on information society services, in particular electronic commerce, in the internal market Directive on elec mission, by trade, professional and consumer associations or organisations, of their assessment of the application of tronic commerce OJ L 178, 17.7.2000, p. 1 . their codes of conduct and their impact upon practices, habits or customs relating to electronic commerce Article 19 e the drawing up of codes of conduct regarding the protec tion of minors and human dignity. Cooperation 2. Member States and the Commission shall encourage the involvement of associations or organisations representing 1. Member States shall have adequate means of supervision consumers in the drafting and implementation of codes of and investigation necessary to implement this Directive effec conduct affecting their interests and drawn up in accordance tively and shall ensure that service providers supply them with with paragraph 1 a . Where appropriate, to take account of the requisite information. their specific needs, associations representing the visually impaired and disabled should be consulted. 2. Member States shall cooperate with other Member States they shall, to that end, appoint one or several contact points, Article 17 whose details they shall communicate to the other Member States and to the Commission. Out of court dispute settlement 3. Member States shall, as quickly as possible, and in conformity with national law, provide the assistance and 1. Member States shall ensure that, in the event of disagree information requested by other Member States or by the ment between an information society service provider and the Commission, including by appropriate electronic means. recipient of the service, their legislation does not hamper the use of out of court schemes, available under national law, for dispute settlement, including appropriate electronic means. 4. Member States shall establish contact points which shall be accessible at least by electronic means and from which 2. Member States shall encourage bodies responsible for recipients and service providers may the out of court settlement of, in particular, consumer disputes to operate in a way which provides adequate procedural a obtain general information on contractual rights and guarantees for the parties concerned. obligations as well as on the complaint and redress mechanisms available in the event of disputes, including practical aspects involved in the use of such mechanisms 3. Member States shall encourage bodies responsible for out of court dispute settlement to inform the Commission of the significant decisions they take regarding information b obtain the details of authorities, associations or organis society services and to transmit any other information on the ations from which they may obtain further information or practices, usages or customs relating to electronic commerce. practical assistance. 5. Member States shall encourage the communication to Article 18 the Commission of any significant administrative or judicial decisions taken in their territory regarding disputes relating to Court actions information society services and practices, usages and customs relating to electronic commerce. The Commission shall com municate these decisions to the other Member States. 1. Member States shall ensure that court actions available under national law concerning information society services activities allow for the rapid adoption of measures, including Article 20 interim measures, designed to terminate any alleged infringe ment and to prevent any further impairment of the interests involved. Sanctions 2. The Annex to Directive 98 27 EC shall be supplemented Member States shall determine the sanctions applicable to as follows infringements of national provisions adopted pursuant to this Directive and shall take all measures necessary to ensure that they are enforced. The sanctions they provide for shall be 11. Directive 2000 31 EC of the European Parliament and of the Council of 8 June 2000 on certain legal aspects effective, proportionate and dissuasive.  17.7.2000 EN L 178 15 Official Journal of the European Communities CHAPTER IV Article 22 Transposition FINAL PROVISIONS 1. Member States shall bring into force the laws, regulations and administrative provisions necessary to comply with this Directive before 17 January 2002. They shall forthwith inform the Commission thereof. Article 21 2. When Member States adopt the measures referred to in paragraph 1, these shall contain a reference to this Directive or shall be accompanied by such reference at the time of their Re examination official publication. The methods of making such reference shall be laid down by Member States. 1. Before 17 July 2003, and thereafter every two years, the Article 23 Commission shall submit to the European Parliament, the Council and the Economic and Social Committee a report on Entry into force the application of this Directive, accompanied, where necess ary, by proposals for adapting it to legal, technical and This Directive shall enter into force on the day of its publication economic developments in the field of information society in the Official Journal of the European Communities. services, in particular with respect to crime prevention, the protection of minors, consumer protection and to the proper Article 24 functioning of the internal market. Addressees 2. In examining the need for an adaptation of this Directive, This Directive is addressed to the Member States. the report shall in particular analyse the need for proposals concerning the liability of providers of hyperlinks and location Done at Luxemburg, 8 june 2000. tool services, notice and take down procedures and the attribution of liability following the taking down of content. For the European Parliament For the Council The report shall also analyse the need for additional conditions for the exemption from liability, provided for in Articles 12 The President The President and 13, in the light of technical developments, and the possibility of applying the internal market principles to unsolicited commercial communications by electronic mail. N. FONTAINE G. d OLIVEIRA MARTINS  L 178 16 EN 17.7.2000 Official Journal of the European Communities ANNEX DEROGATIONS FROM ARTICLE 3 As provided for in Article 3 3 , Article 3 1 and 2 do not apply to copyright, neighbouring rights, rights referred to in Directive 87 54 EEC 1 and Directive 96 9 EC 2 as well as industrial property rights, the emission of electronic money by institutions in respect of which Member States have applied one of the derogations provided for in Article 8 1 of Directive 2000 46 EC 3 , Article 44 2 of Directive 85 611 EEC 4 , Article 30 and Title IV of Directive 92 49 EEC 5 , Title IV of Directive 92 96 EEC 6 , Articles 7 and 8 of Directive 88 357 EEC 7 and Article 4 of Directive 90 619 EEC 8 , the freedom of the parties to choose the law applicable to their contract, contractual obligations concerning consumer contacts, formal validity of contracts creating or transferring rights in real estate where such contracts are subject to mandatory formal requirements of the law of the Member State where the real estate is situated, the permissibility of unsolicited commercial communications by electronic mail. 1 OJ L 24, 27.1.1987, p. 36. 2 OJ L 77, 27.3.1996, p. 20. 3 Not yet published in the Official Journal. 4 OJ L 375, 31.12.1985, p. 3. Directive as last amended by Directive 95 26 EC OJ L 168, 18.7.1995, p. 7 . 5 OJ L 228, 11.8.1992, p. 1. Directive as last amended by Directive 95 26 EC. 6 OJ L 360, 9.12.1992, p. 2. Directive as last amended by Directive 95 26 EC. 7 OJ L 172, 4.7.1988, p. 1. Directive as last amended by Directive 92 49 EC. 8 OJ L 330, 29.11.1990, p. 50. Directive as last amended by Directive 92 96 EC. 