 Acts adopted pursuant to Title VI of the Treaty on European Union COUNCIL FRAMEWORK DECISION of 13 June 2002 on combating terrorism 2002 475 JHA THE COUNCIL OF THE EUROPEAN UNION, Having regard to the Treaty establishing the European Union, and in particular Article 29, Article 31 e and Article 34 2 b thereof, Having regard to the proposal from the Commission 1 , Having regard to the opinion of the European Parliament 2 , Whereas 1 The European Union is founded on the universal values of human dignity, liberty, equality and solidarity, respect for human rights and fundamental freedoms. It is based on the principle of democracy and the principle of the rule of law, principles which are common to the Member States. 2 Terrorism constitutes one of the most serious violations of those principles. The La Gomera Declaration adopted at the informal Council meeting on 14 October 1995 af firmed that terrorism constitutes a threat to democracy, to the free exercise of human rights and to economic and social development. 3 All or some Member States are party to a number of conventions relating to terrorism. The Council of Europe Convention of 27 January 1977 on the Suppression of Terrorism does not regard terrorist offences as political offences or as offences connected with political offences or as offences inspired by political motives. The United Nations has adopted the Convention for the suppression of terrorist bombings of 15 December 1997 and the Convention for the suppression of financing terrorism of 9 December 1999. A draft global Convention against ter rorism is currently being negotiated within the United Nations. 4 At European Union level, on 3 December 1998 the Council adopted the Action Plan of the Council and the Commission on how best to implement the provisions of the Treaty of Amsterdam on an area of freedom, se curity and justice 3 . Account should also be taken of the Council Conclusions of 20 September 2001 and of the Extraordinary European Council plan of action to com bat terrorism of 21 September 2001. Terrorism was re ferred to in the conclusions of the Tampere European Council of 15 and 16 October 1999, and of the Santa María da Feira European Council of 19 and 20 June 2000. It was also mentioned in the Commission commu nication to the Council and the European Parliament on the biannual update of the scoreboard to review progress on the creation of an area of freedom, security and jus tice in the European Union second half of 2000 . Furthermore, on 5 September 2001 the European Parlia ment adopted a recommendation on the role of the Eur opean Union in combating terrorism. It should, more over, be recalled that on 30 July 1996 twenty five measures to fight against terrorism were advocated by the leading industrialised countries G7 and Russia meeting in Paris. 5 The European Union has adopted numerous specific measures having an impact on terrorism and organised crime, such as the Council Decision of 3 December 1998 instructing Europol to deal with crimes committed or likely to be committed in the course of terrorist activities against life, limb, personal freedom or prop erty 4 Council Joint Action 96 610 JHA of 15 October 1996 concerning the creation and maintenance of a Di rectory of specialised counter terrorist competences, skills and expertise to facilitate counter terrorism coop eration between the Member States of the European Un ion 5 Council Joint Action 98 428 JHA of 29 June 1998 on the creation of a European Judicial Network 6 , with responsibilities in terrorist offences, in particular Article 2 Council Joint Action 98 733 JHA of 21 De cember 1998 on making it a criminal offence to partici pate in a criminal organisation in the Member States of the European Union 7 and the Council Recommenda tion of 9 December 1999 on cooperation in combating the financing of terrorist groups 8 . 22.6.2002 L 164 3 Official Journal of the European Communities EN 1 OJ C 332 E, 27.11.2001, p. 300. 2 Opinion delivered on 6 February 2002 not yet published in the Of ficial Journal . 3 OJ C 19, 23.1.1999, p. 1. 4 OJ C 26, 30.1.1999, p. 22. 5 OJ L 273, 25.10.1996, p. 1. 6 OJ L 191, 7.7.1998, p. 4. 7 OJ L 351, 29.12.1998, p. 1. 8 OJ C 373, 23.12.1999, p. 1.   6 The definition of terrorist offences should be approxi mated in all Member States, including those offences re lating to terrorist groups. Furthermore, penalties and sanctions should be provided for natural and legal per sons having committed or being liable for such offences, which reflect the seriousness of such offences. 7 Jurisdictional rules should be established to ensure that the terrorist offence may be effectively prosecuted. 8 Victims of terrorist offences are vulnerable, and therefore specific measures are necessary with regard to them. 9 Given that the objectives of the proposed action cannot be sufficiently achieved by the Member States unilater ally, and can therefore, because of the need for recipro city, be better achieved at the level of the Union, the Union may adopt measures, in accordance with the prin ciple of subsidiarity. In accordance with the principle of proportionality, this Framework Decision does not go beyond what is necessary in order to achieve those ob jectives. 10 This Framework Decision respects fundamental rights as guaranteed by the European Convention for the Protec tion of Human Rights and Fundamental Freedoms and as they emerge from the constitutional traditions common to the Member States as principles of Community law. The Union observes the principles recognised by Article 6 2 of the Treaty on European Union and reflected in the Charter of Fundamental Rights of the European Un ion, notably Chapter VI thereof. Nothing in this Frame work Decision may be interpreted as being intended to reduce or restrict fundamental rights or freedoms such as the right to strike, freedom of assembly, of association or of expression, including the right of everyone to form and to join trade unions with others for the protection of his or her interests and the related right to demon strate. 11 Actions by armed forces during periods of armed con flict, which are governed by international humanitarian law within the meaning of these terms under that law, and, inasmuch as they are governed by other rules of in ternational law, actions by the armed forces of a State in the exercise of their official duties are not governed by this Framework Decision, HAS ADOPTED THIS FRAMEWORK DECISION Article 1 Terrorist offences and fundamental rights and principles 1. Each Member State shall take the necessary measures to ensure that the intentional acts referred to below in points a to i , as defined as offences under national law, which, given their nature or context, may seriously damage a country or an international organisation where committed with the aim of seriously intimidating a population, or unduly compelling a Government or international organisa tion to perform or abstain from performing any act, or seriously destabilising or destroying the fundamental politi cal, constitutional, economic or social structures of a coun try or an international organisation, shall be deemed to be terrorist offences a attacks upon a person s life which may cause death b attacks upon the physical integrity of a person c kidnapping or hostage taking d causing extensive destruction to a Government or pub lic facility, a transport system, an infrastructure facility, including an information system, a fixed platform lo cated on the continental shelf, a public place or private property likely to endanger human life or result in ma jor economic loss e seizure of aircraft, ships or other means of public or goods transport f manufacture, possession, acquisition, transport, supply or use of weapons, explosives or of nuclear, biological or chemical weapons, as well as research into, and de velopment of, biological and chemical weapons g release of dangerous substances, or causing fires, floods or explosions the effect of which is to endanger human life h interfering with or disrupting the supply of water, power or any other fundamental natural resource the ef fect of which is to endanger human life i threatening to commit any of the acts listed in a to h . 2. This Framework Decision shall not have the effect of al tering the obligation to respect fundamental rights and funda mental legal principles as enshrined in Article 6 of the Treaty on European Union. Article 2 Offences relating to a terrorist group 1. For the purposes of this Framework Decision, terrorist group shall mean a structured group of more than two per sons, established over a period of time and acting in concert to commit terrorist offences. Structured group shall mean a group that is not randomly formed for the immediate commis sion of an offence and that does not need to have formally de fined roles for its members, continuity of its membership or a developed structure. 22.6.2002 L 164 4 Official Journal of the European Communities EN  2. Each Member State shall take the necessary measures to ensure that the following intentional acts are punishable a directing a terrorist group b participating in the activities of a terrorist group, including by supplying information or material resources, or by fund ing its activities in any way, with knowledge of the fact that such participation will contribute to the criminal activities of the terrorist group. Article 3 Offences linked to terrorist activities Each Member State shall take the necessary measures to ensure that terrorist linked offences include the following acts a aggravated theft with a view to committing one of the acts listed in Article 1 1 b extortion with a view to the perpetration of one of the acts listed in Article 1 1 c drawing up false administrative documents with a view to committing one of the acts listed in Article 1 1 a to h and Article 2 2 b . Article 4 Inciting, aiding or abetting, and attempting 1. Each Member State shall take the necessary measures to ensure that inciting or aiding or abetting an offence referred to in Article 1 1 , Articles 2 or 3 is made punishable. 2. Each Member State shall take the necessary measures to ensure that attempting to commit an offence referred to in Arti cle 1 1 and Article 3, with the exception of possession as pro vided for in Article 1 1 f and the offence referred to in Article 1 1 i , is made punishable. Article 5 Penalties 1. Each Member State shall take the necessary measures to ensure that the offences referred to in Articles 1 to 4 are pun ishable by effective, proportionate and dissuasive criminal pe nalties, which may entail extradition. 2. Each Member State shall take the necessary measures to ensure that the terrorist offences referred to in Article 1 1 and offences referred to in Article 4, inasmuch as they relate to ter rorist offences, are punishable by custodial sentences heavier than those imposable under national law for such offences in the absence of the special intent required pursuant to Article 1 1 , save where the sentences imposable are already the maxi mum possible sentences under national law. 3. Each Member State shall take the necessary measures to ensure that offences listed in Article 2 are punishable by custo dial sentences, with a maximum sentence of not less than fif teen years for the offence referred to in Article 2 2 a , and for the offences listed in Article 2 2 b a maximum sentence of not less than eight years. In so far as the offence referred to in Article 2 2 a refers only to the act in Article 1 1 i , the maxi mum sentence shall not be less than eight years. Article 6 Particular circumstances Each Member State may take the necessary measures to ensure that the penalties referred to in Article 5 may be reduced if the offender a renounces terrorist activity, and b provides the administrative or judicial authorities with in formation which they would not otherwise have been able to obtain, helping them to i prevent or mitigate the effects of the offence ii identify or bring to justice the other offenders iii find evidence or iv prevent further offences referred to in Articles 1 to 4. Article 7 Liability of legal persons 1. Each Member State shall take the necessary measures to ensure that legal persons can be held liable for any of the of fences referred to in Articles 1 to 4 committed for their benefit by any person, acting either individually or as part of an organ of the legal person, who has a leading position within the legal person, based on one of the following a a power of representation of the legal person b an authority to take decisions on behalf of the legal person c an authority to exercise control within the legal person. 2. Apart from the cases provided for in paragraph 1, each Member State shall take the necessary measures to ensure that legal persons can be held liable where the lack of supervision or control by a person referred to in paragraph 1 has made possible the commission of any of the offences referred to in Articles 1 to 4 for the benefit of that legal person by a person under its authority. 3. Liability of legal persons under paragraphs 1 and 2 shall not exclude criminal proceedings against natural persons who are perpetrators, instigators or accessories in any of the offences referred to in Articles 1 to 4. 22.6.2002 L 164 5 Official Journal of the European Communities EN  Article 8 Penalties for legal persons Each Member State shall take the necessary measures to ensure that a legal person held liable pursuant to Article 7 is punish able by effective, proportionate and dissuasive penalties, which shall include criminal or non criminal fines and may include other penalties, such as a exclusion from entitlement to public benefits or aid b temporary or permanent disqualification from the practice of commercial activities c placing under judicial supervision d a judicial winding up order e temporary or permanent closure of establishments which have been used for committing the offence. Article 9 Jurisdiction and prosecution 1. Each Member State shall take the necessary measures to establish its jurisdiction over the offences referred to in Articles 1 to 4 where a the offence is committed in whole or in part in its territory. Each Member State may extend its jurisdiction if the offence is committed in the territory of a Member State b the offence is committed on board a vessel flying its flag or an aircraft registered there c the offender is one of its nationals or residents d the offence is committed for the benefit of a legal person established in its territory e the offence is committed against the institutions or people of the Member State in question or against an institution of the European Union or a body set up in accordance with the Treaty establishing the European Community or the Treaty on European Union and based in that Member State. 2. When an offence falls within the jurisdiction of more than one Member State and when any of the States concerned can validly prosecute on the basis of the same facts, the Member States concerned shall cooperate in order to decide which of them will prosecute the offenders with the aim, if possible, of centralising proceedings in a single Member State. To this end, the Member States may have recourse to any body or mechan ism established within the European Union in order to facilitate cooperation between their judicial authorities and the coordina tion of their action. Sequential account shall be taken of the fol lowing factors the Member State shall be that in the territory of which the acts were committed, the Member State shall be that of which the perpetrator is a national or resident, the Member State shall be the Member State of origin of the victims, the Member State shall be that in the territory of which the perpetrator was found. 3. Each Member State shall take the necessary measures also to establish its jurisdiction over the offences referred to in Articles 1 to 4 in cases where it refuses to hand over or extra dite a person suspected or convicted of such an offence to an other Member State or to a third country. 4. Each Member State shall ensure that its jurisdiction covers cases in which any of the offences referred to in Articles 2 and 4 has been committed in whole or in part within its territory, wherever the terrorist group is based or pursues its criminal ac tivities. 5. This Article shall not exclude the exercise of jurisdiction in criminal matters as laid down by a Member State in accor dance with its national legislation. Article 10 Protection of, and assistance to, victims 1. Member States shall ensure that investigations into, or prosecution of, offences covered by this Framework Decision are not dependent on a report or accusation made by a person subjected to the offence, at least if the acts were committed on the territory of the Member State. 2. In addition to the measures laid down in the Council Fra mework Decision 2001 220 JHA of 15 March 2001 on the standing of victims in criminal proceedings 1 , each Member State shall, if necessary, take all measures possible to ensure ap propriate assistance for victims families. Article 11 Implementation and reports 1. Member States shall take the necessary measures to com ply with this Framework Decision by 31 December 2002. 2. By 31 December 2002, Member States shall forward to the General Secretariat of the Council and to the Commission the text of the provisions transposing into their national law the obligations imposed on them under this Framework Deci sion. On the basis of a report drawn up from that information and a report from the Commission, the Council shall assess, by 31 December 2003, whether Member States have taken the ne cessary measures to comply with this Framework Decision. 3. The Commission report shall specify, in particular, trans position into the criminal law of the Member States of the obli gation referred to in Article 5 2 . 22.6.2002 L 164 6 Official Journal of the European Communities EN 1 OJ L 82, 22.3.2001, p. 1.  Article 12 Territorial application This Framework Decision shall apply to Gibraltar. Article 13 Entry into force This Framework Decision shall enter into force on the day of its publication in the Official Journal. Done at Luxembourg, 13 June 2002. For the Council The President M. RAJOY BREY 22.6.2002 L 164 7 Official Journal of the European Communities EN 