The Networking Information Technology R D Program and the National Artificial Intelligence Initiative Office SUPPLEMENT TO THE PRESIDENT S FY2022 BUDGET A report by the SUBCOMMITTEE ON NETWORKING AND INFORMATION TECHNOLOGY RESEARCH AND DEVELOPMENT COMMITTEE ON SCIENCE AND TECHNOLOGY ENTERPRISE and the MACHINE LEARNING AND ARTIFICIAL INTELLIGENCE SUBCOMMITTEE COMMITTEE ON TECHNOLOGY SELECT COMMITTEE ON ARTIFICIAL INTELLIGENCE of the NATIONAL SCIENCE AND TECHNOLOGY COUNCIL December 2021   NITRD and NAIIO Supplement to the President s FY2022 Budget About the National Science and Technology Council Established by Executive Order on November 23, 1993, the National Science and Technology Council NSTC coordinates science and technology S T policy across the Federal research and development R D agencies. Chaired by the President, the membership of the Cabinet level National Science and Technology Council includes the Vice President, Director of the Office of Science and Technology Policy, and Cabinet Secretaries and Agency Heads with significant S T responsibilities. A primary objective of the NSTC is to establish clear national goals for Federal S T investments in a broad array of areas spanning virtually all the mission areas of the Executive Branch. The NSTC prepares R D strategies that are coordinated across agencies to ensure that the Federal Government s investment packages and policies are smart and aimed at accomplishing multiple national goals. About the Office of Science and Technology Policy Congress established the White House Office of Science and Technology Policy OSTP in 1976 to advise the President and others within the Executive Office of the President on scientific, engineering, and technological aspects of the economy, national security, homeland security, health, foreign relations, and the environment. OSTP leads efforts across the Federal Government to develop and implement sound science and technology policies, plans, programs, and budgets, and it works with the private and philanthropic sectors state, local, tribal, and territorial governments the research and academic communities and other nations toward this end. OSTP also assists the Office of Management and Budget with its annual review and analysis of Federal R D in budgets. OSTP s Senate confirmed Director co chairs the President s Council of Advisors on Science and Technology and the NSTC. About the Select Committee on Artificial Intelligence The Select Committee on Artificial Intelligence advises and assists the NSTC to improve the overall effectiveness and productivity of Federal R D efforts related to artificial intelligence AI to ensure continued U.S. leadership in this field. It addresses national and international policy matters that cut across agency boundaries, and it provides formal mechanisms for interagency policy coordination and development for Federal AI R D activities. It also advises the Executive Office of the President on interagency AI R D priorities works to create balanced and comprehensive AI R D programs and partnerships leverages Federal data and computational resources across department and agency missions and supports a national technical AI workforce. The National Artificial Intelligence Initiative Office NAIIO provides technical and administrative support for the Select Committee on AI. About the Subcommittee on Machine Learning and Artificial Intelligence The Machine Learning and Artificial Intelligence MLAI Subcommittee monitors the state of the art in machine learning ML and AI within the Federal Government, in the private sector, and internationally to watch for the arrival of important technology milestones in the development of AI, to coordinate the use of and foster the sharing of knowledge and best practices about ML and AI by the Federal Government, and to consult in the development of Federal MLAI R D priorities. The NAIIO and the NITRD National Coordination Office jointly coordinate technical and administrative support for the MLAI Subcommittee. About the Subcommittee on Networking Information Technology Research Development The Networking and Information Technology Research and Development NITRD Program has been the Nation s primary source of federally funded work on pioneering information technologies IT in computing, networking, and software since it was first established as the High Performance Computing and Communications program following passage of the High Performance Computing Act of 1991. The NITRD Subcommittee of the NSTC Committee on Science and Technology Enterprise guides the multiagency NITRD Program in its work to provide the R D foundations for ensuring continued U.S. technological leadership and meeting the Nation s needs for advanced IT. The National Coordination Office NCO supports the NITRD Subcommittee and its Interagency Working Groups IWGs . About This Document This document is a supplement to the President s FY2022 Budget Request to Congress. Following Congressional mandate, the Supplement incorporates budgetary and programmatic information for member agencies of the NITRD Program and also, for the first time, of the National Artificial Intelligence Initiative. This report covers FY2020 actual investments, FY2021 enacted, and FY2022 requested funding levels by agency and Program Component Area PCA for all NITRD R D programs, as well as describing the key R D programs and coordination activities planned for FY2022 by the Federal agencies participating in NITRD. This Supplement also reports specific agency investments for FYs 2020 2022 for advanced wireless communications and for AI and the National AI Research Institutes. A separate appendix, the FY2022 Federal Cybersecurity R D Strategic Plan Implementation Roadmap lists existing and proposed R D projects that address critical national cybersecurity needs Copyright Information This document is a work of the United States Government and is in the public domain see 17 U.S.C. 105 . It may be distributed and copied with acknowledgment to OSTP. Requests to use any images must be made to the provider identified in the image credits or to OSTP if no provider is identified. This and other NITRD documents are available at Published in the United States of America, 2021.   NITRD and NAIIO Supplement to the President s FY2022 Budget EXECUTIVE OFFICE OF THE PRESIDENT NATIONAL SCIENCE AND TECHNOLOGY COUNCIL WASHINGTON, D.C. 20502 December 1, 2021 Members of Congress I am pleased to share with you the Networking Information Technology R D Program and National Artificial Intelligence Initiative Office Supplement to the President s FY2022 Budget, and in a separate appendix, the FY2022 Federal Cybersecurity R D Strategic Plan Implementation Roadmap. The NITRD Program, composed of 25 member agencies and more than 60 participating agencies, coordinates Federal research and development R D investments in advanced digital technologies that are essential to the Nation s economic growth and prosperity. The Supplement and Roadmap support the priorities that President Biden directed the Office of Science and Technology Policy to undertake, which will refresh and reinvigorate our national science and technology strategy and set the Nation on a strong course for the next 75 years. As the Nation s primary source of federally funded IT R D, NITRD fosters the transition of artificial intelligence, high performance computing HPC , and data science into medical breakthroughs and equitable mitigation of climate change and enables R D in advanced networking, cybersecurity, and other IT research innovations that strengthen our national security and protect our economy. New this year, and in response to the National Artificial Intelligence Initiative Act NAIIA of 2020, this Supplement provides the status of R D investments and activities in support of the NAIIA, including details of the National AI Research Institutes. The National AI Research Institutes, formed among multidimensional partnerships of public and private entities, address sector specific or cross cutting challenges e.g., trustworthiness and translate the research into products, applications, and services. This year NITRD marks the 30th anniversary of the signing of the High Performance Computing Act of 1991. This legislation expanded Federal R D support for HPC, ensuring continued U.S. technological leadership. President Biden has proclaimed the need to advance American S T leadership for generations to come the Nation needs cutting edge technologies that are made in the United States by U.S. workers and new solutions that will propel market driven change and jump start economic growth. I look forward to continuing to work with you to support the President s priorities, of which these vital Federal programs are an important part. Sincerely, Eric S. Lander Director, Office of Science and Technology Policy   ii NITRD and NAIIO Supplement to the President s FY2022 Budget NATIONAL SCIENCE AND TECHNOLOGY COUNCIL Chair Eric Lander, Director, OSTP Staff Kei Koizumi, Acting Executive Director, NSTC Committee on Science and Technology Enterprise Subcommittee on Networking and Information Technology Research and Development NITRD Co Chair Kathleen Kamie Roberts, NITRD National Coordination Office NCO Co Chair Margaret Martonosi, National Science Foundation NSF Executive Secretary Nekeia Butler, NCO National Artificial Intelligence Initiative Office Director Lynne E. Parker, OSTP National Coordination Office for Networking Information Technology Research Development Director Kathleen Kamie Roberts NITRD Subcommittee Member Agencies and Representatives Principal representatives are listed first Department of Commerce DOC National Institute of Standards and Technology NIST James St. Pierre Elham Tabassi National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration NOAA Frank Indiviglio Leslie Hart Department of Defense DOD Defense Advanced Research Projects Agency DARPA William Scherlis Military Services Air Force Matthew D. Cocuzzi Army Jeffrey D. Singleton Navy Sandy Landsberg Samuel Weber National Security Agency NSA Rita Bush Shane Strutz Office of the Secretary of Defense OSD Kevin T. Geiss Keith A. Krapels Department of Energy DOE Artificial Intelligence Technology Office DOE AITO Pamela K. Isom Jonnie Bradley National Nuclear Security Administration DOE NNSA Thuc T. Hoang Department of Energy DOE continued Office of Cybersecurity, Energy Security, and Emergency Response DOE CESER Fowad Muneer Office of Science DOE SC Barbara Helland Department of Health and Human Services HHS Agency for Healthcare Research and Quality AHRQ Christine Dymek Chun Ju Janey Hsiao National Institutes of Health NIH Susan Gregurick Peter Lyster National Institute for Occupational Safety and Health NIOSH Frank Hearl Office of the National Coordinator for Health Information Technology ONC Steven Posnack Stephen Konya Department of Homeland Security DHS Science Technology Directorate S T Sridhar Kowdley Russell Becker John Vehmeyer Department of the Interior DOI U.S. Geological Survey USGS Tim Quinn Department of Justice DOJ National Institute of Justice NIJ Kyle Fox Mark Greene Department of State State Office of S T Cooperation Scott L. Sellars Department of Veterans Affairs VA National AI Institute NAII Gil Alterovitz National Aeronautics and Space Administration NASA Kathleen B. Loftin Bryan A. Biegel National Archives and Records Administration NARA Hung Nguyen National Reconnaissance Office NRO Thomas Jenkins National Science Foundation NSF Margaret Martonosi Joydip Kundu Executive Office of the President Office of Management Budget OMB Avital Bar Shalom Liuyi Pei Office of Science and Technology Policy OSTP Lynne E. Parker   NITRD and NAIIO Supplement to the President s FY2022 Budget iii OTHER PARTICIPATING DEPARTMENTS AND AGENCIES These Federal departments and agencies participate in NITRD activities and have mission interests in advanced networking and IT R D and applications, but they are not members of the NITRD Subcommittee. Department of Agriculture USDA Agricultural Research Service ARS Agriculture and Food Research Initiative AFRI National Institute of Food and Agriculture NIFA Department of Commerce DOC International Trade Administration ITA National Telecommunications and Information Administration NTIA United States Census Bureau Census U.S. Patent and Trademark Office USPTO Department of Defense DOD Defense Health Agency DHA Defense Research and Engineering Network DREN Joint Artificial Intelligence Center JAIC Military Services Facilities Air Force Office of Scientific Research AFOSR Army Research Laboratory ARL Combat Capabilities Development Command Army CCDC Command, Control, Computers, Communications, Cyber, Intelligence, Surveillance and Reconnaissance Center Army C5ISR C5ISR Space and Terrestrial Communications Directorate C5ISR S TCD High Performance Computing Modernization Program Army HPCMP Naval Research Laboratory NRL U.S. Army Medical Research and Development Command USAMRDC Office of the Under Secretary of Defense for Research and Engineering OUSD R E Test Resource Management Center TRMC U.S. Army Corps of Engineers USACE U.S. Cyber Command USCYBERCOM Department of Energy DOE Advanced Research Projects Agency Energy ARPA E Office of Energy Efficiency and Renewable Energy EERE Office of Electricity OE Office of Fossil Energy FE Office of Nuclear Energy NE Department of Health and Human Services HHS Administration for Community Living ACL Centers for Disease Control and Prevention CDC Centers for Medicare and Medicaid Services CMS Food and Drug Administration FDA Health Resources and Services Administration HRSA Indian Health Service IHS HHS continued National Cancer Institute NCI National Center for Health Statistics NCHS Substance Abuse and Mental Health Services Administration SAMHSA Department of Homeland Security Cybersecurity and Infrastructure Security Agency CISA Department of Justice DOJ Drug Enforcement Administration DEA Federal Bureau of Investigation FBI Department of Labor DOL Bureau of Labor Statistics BLS Occupational Safety Health Administration OSHA Department of Transportation DOT Federal Aviation Administration FAA Federal Highway Administration FHWA Federal Motor Carrier Safety Administration FMCSA Federal Railroad Administration FRA Federal Transit Administration FTA Intelligent Transportation Systems Joint Program Office ITS JPO Maritime Administration MARAD National Highway Traffic Safety Administration NHTSA Pipeline and Hazardous Materials Safety Administration PHMSA Department of the Treasury Treasury Financial Crimes Enforcement Network FCEN Department of Veterans Affairs VA Environmental Protection Agency EPA Federal Communications Commission FCC Federal Trade Commission FTC General Services Administration GSA Intelligence Community Intelligence Advanced Research Projects Activity IARPA National Maritime Intelligence Integration Office NMIO Office of Director of National Intelligence ODNI National Transportation Safety Board NTSB Nuclear Regulatory Commission NRC Social Security Administration SSA Note Any mention in the text of commercial or academic partners in Federal R D activities is for information only it does not imply endorsement or recommendation by any U.S. Government agency.   iv NITRD and NAIIO Supplement to the President s FY2022 Budget TABLE OF CONTENTS National Science and Technology Council ii Other Participating Departments and Agencies iii 1. Introduction 1 NITRD Responses to the Administration s Five Overarching S T Questions 2 NITRD Budget Reporting, Organizational Structures, and Activities 9 2020 Review of NITRD by the President s Council of Advisors on Science and Technology 12 Structure of this Supplement 12 2. Agency NITRD and NAIIO Related R D Investments, FYs 2020 2022 13 Overview 13 Budget Charts 13 Table 1. Agency Budgets by NITRD PCA, FYs 2020 2022 14 Table 2. Agency Budgets by NITRD PCA for AI R D, FYs 2020 2022 16 Table 3. Agency Budgets for NSF Led National AI Research Institutes, FYs 2020 2022 19 Table 4. Other Federally Funded AI Institute Budgets, FYs 2020 2022 20 Table 5. NITRD Agency Budgets for AWN R D, FYs 2020 2022 20 Budget Analysis 21 3. Key Activities of the NITRD PCAs and IWGs 23 Artificial Intelligence AI Research and Development R D PCA 23 Artificial Intelligence R D IWG 23 Computing Enabled Human Interaction, Communication, and Augmentation CHuman PCA 27 Computing Enabled Networked Physical Systems CNPS PCA 29 Computing Enabled Networked Physical Systems IWG 29 Cyber Security and Privacy CSP PCA 32 Cyber Security and Information Assurance CSIA IWG 32 Privacy Research and Development IWG 35 Education and Workforce EdW PCA 37 Electronics for Networking and Information Technology ENIT PCA 41 Enabling R D for High Capability Computing Systems EHCS PCA 42 High End Computing HEC IWG. 42 High Capability Computing Infrastructure and Applications HCIA PCA 44 High End Computing IWG 44 Intelligent Robotics and Autonomous Systems IRAS PCA 47 Intelligent Robotics and Autonomous Systems IWG 47 Large Scale Data Management and Analysis LSDMA PCA 50 Big Data BD IWG 50 Large Scale Networking LSN PCA 52 Advanced Wireless R D Sub PCA 52 Large Scale Networking IWG 52 Wireless Spectrum R D WSRD IWG 54 Software Productivity, Sustainability, and Quality SPSQ PCA 57 Software Productivity, Sustainability, and Quality IWG 57 4. Other NITRD Interagency Coordination Activities 59 Health Information Technology R D HITRD IWG 59 5. Overview of the National Artificial Intelligence Research Institutes 61 Introduction 61 NSF Led AI Institutes, by R D Theme 61 Other AI Institutes 73 Abbreviations. 74  NITRD and NAIIO Supplement to the President s FY2022 Budget 1 1. Introduction Information technology IT and its enabling digital technologies in computing, networking, and software have radically transformed human society across the globe over the 75 years since the end of World War II. American innovators, companies, universities, and government together created a prolific science and technology S T research and development R D ecosystem to lead this global transformation. As competition for leadership in high performance computing HPC began to escalate across the world in the 1980s, U.S. legislators felt the imperative to proactively guide and coordinate Federal R D for HPC, IT, and networking innovations in order to protect American interests. In the High Performance Computing Act of 1991, Congress launched what is now called the Networking and Information Technology Research and Development NITRD Program Congress has reauthorized and expanded the NITRD Program three times, most recently in the 2017 American Innovation and Competitiveness Act.1 NITRD celebrates 30 years of innovation and collaboration in December 2021. The NITRD Program s mandate is to coordinate high impact Federal R D that identifies, develops, and transitions into use the secure, advanced capabilities in HPC, IT, networking, and software that the Federal Government needs, and to foster vibrant public private R D partnerships so that, working together, American scientists, policies, and facilities can capably provide the world leading IT technologies on which the Nation depends. The Program also seeks to build, support, and leverage a diverse, highly skilled S T workforce and international alliances. Representatives of the 25 NITRD member agencies,2 National Science and Technology Council NSTC , Office of Management and Budget, and White House Office of Science and Technology Policy OSTP , comprise the NSTC s NITRD Subcommittee, which oversees the NITRD Program with operational assistance from the Program s National Coordination Office NCO . The President s Council of Advisors on Science and Technology PCAST independently reviews the NITRD Program at least every three years.3 This report meets NITRD s obligation to submit to Congress annually a Supplement to the President s Budget in which member agencies describe their R D budget requests and programs and activities for the coming fiscal 1 2 See p. ii for a list of current NITRD member agencies. 3 PCAST s most recent review was in 2020 see and p. 12. The President s Plan to Reinvigorate U.S. S T The emergence of the digital arena has redefined the ways we innovate, communicate, and experience the world. And the nature of discovery itself has changed by leaps and bounds I believe it is essential that we refresh and reinvigorate our national science and technology strategy to set us on a strong course for the next 75 years, so that our children and grandchildren may inhabit a healthier, safer, more just, peaceful, and prosperous world... I am tasking you and your colleagues with addressing five questions 1. What can we learn from the pandemic about what is possible or what ought to be possible to address the widest range of needs related to our public health 2. How can breakthroughs in science and technology create powerful new solutions to address climate change propelling market driven change, jump starting economic growth, improving health, and growing jobs, especially in communities that have been left behind 3. How can the United States ensure that it is the world leader in the technologies and industries of the future that will be critical to our economic prosperity and national security 4. How can we guarantee that the fruits of science and technology are fully shared across America and among all Americans 5. How can we ensure the long term health of the science and technology ecosystem of our Nation From President Biden s letter to Eric Lander, OSTP Director Nominee, 15 January 2021 The Senate confirmed Dr. Lander as OSTP Director on 28 May.  1. Introduction 2 NITRD and NAIIO Supplement to the President s FY2022 Budget year in HPC, IT, and networking. The report also addresses how the NITRD Program and its members plan to support the S T priorities of the President and OSTP see sidebar on page 1 . Following enactment of the National Artificial Intelligence Initiative Act NAIIA of 2020 4 and establishment of the National Artificial Intelligence Initiative Office NAIIO , this Supplement also meets NAIIO s obligation to submit NAIIA related budget and program information to Congress as part of the President s annual budget request. Inclusion of National Artificial Intelligence Initiative information in the NITRD Budget Supplement is due to close interweaving of NAIIO and NITRD AI R D activities. As specified in the Act, the tables in Section 2 include a summarized budget in support of the AI Initiative for the preceding, current, and proposed fiscal years, and a disaggregation of spending for the National AI Research Institutes. Section 5 describes the Institutes in more detail. NITRD Responses to the Administration s Five Overarching S T Questions Many NITRD programs already mesh closely with the thrust of the President s five questions to Dr. Lander as summarized in the sidebar on page 1.5 In addition, the NITRD Subcommittee and member agencies will expand existing and establish new R D efforts to address the President s questions. The subsections below summarize some of the key issues and existing NITRD coordinated R D efforts that are relevant to the questions focus areas and or issues that will need to be addressed in future NITRD budgets and programs. 1. NITRD Coordination of R D to Address Public Health Needs Now and in the Future Thirty years of NITRD coordinated Federal investments in computing, IT, and networking underpinned the 2020 2021 national S T response to the COVID 19 pandemic. These facilitated rapid vaccine development by several firms and an ongoing search for therapeutics, cures, and fuller understanding of virus mechanics. Historical NITRD related investments helped many in the Nation to stay connected and continue work, education, medical consults, shopping, etc., while sequestered. NITRD agency developed resources such as supercomputing facilities modeling and simulation software and artificial intelligence AI and machine learning ML capabilities helped researchers parse mountains of data to hone in on the best test collections and research paths helped labs, families, schools, and businesses keep connected via high speed networks and helped leverage active government partnerships with academia and industry. As examples, the COVID 19 HPC Consortium brought DOE National Labs, NSF, and NASA together with industry and academic leaders to provide access to the world s most powerful HPC resources in support of COVID 19 research,6 and agency supported collaborative research demonstrated the power of HPC to accelerate discovery in the fight against the pandemic in the study, AI Driven Multiscale Simulations Illuminate Mechanisms of SARS CoV 2 Spike Dynamics .7 Also, modeling, simulation, and predictive analytics helped essential workers, including health workers, by illuminating mechanisms of disease spread, effective protection, stockpiling of critical equipment, supply chain bottlenecks, and the like. NITRD agency R D continues to develop solutions for public health e.g., see sidebar on page 3 that can be refined and redirected for any national health emergency as required. 4 Division E of the National Defense Authorization Act for Fiscal Year 2021, P.L. 116 283 H.R. 6395 , January 1, 2021 5 science advisor and nominee as director of the office of science and technology policy 6 7 L. Casalino, A. C. Commer, Z Gaieb, et al. 2021. International Journal of High Performance Computing Applications.  1. Introduction NITRD and NAIIO Supplement to the President s FY2022 Budget 3 Learning from COVID 19 Disease Prediction, Prevention, and Communication Prediction, Diagnosis, and Prevention of Infectious Disease The potential exists to move toward a world free from the threat of global pandemics through developing predictive intelligence about future outbreaks via an integrated system of rapid detection, analysis, modeling, and countermeasures. Several Federal agencies are working to improve disease prediction by integrating biological and technical innovations in diagnostics, sensing, modeling, analytics, and human behavior modeling. To leverage what researchers have learned from the COVID 19 pandemic, NSF has supported a series of interdisciplinary workshops to engage and then provide grants to broad and diverse research communities around Predictive Intelligence for Pandemic Prevention PIPP . The workshops assembled experts in the biological, engineering, computer and information, and social, behavioral, and economic sciences to catalyze their knowledge regarding forecasting, real time monitoring, and detection of inflection point events. The workshops focused on integrating fundamental science and engineering advances such as synergistic biological interactions spanning molecular, organismal, and epidemiological scales multiscale smart biosensing and data collection technologies networked sensors in situ computation computational algorithms and frameworks for intelligent processing, analyzing, and modeling of data and understanding disease transmission due to human social behavior and attitudes and the drivers of both. See and opportunities predictive intelligence pandemic prevention phase i development grants pipp. NIH launched its Rapid Acceleration of Diagnostics RADx initiative in April 2020 to address the urgent public health need for fast, effective diagnostic testing to help stem the spread of COVID 19. RADx calls on scientists and engineers to find innovative ways to speed development, validation, and implementation of rapid, accurate, accessible nationwide COVID 19 testing, with a goal to make millions of tests available each week. It aims to develop a platform that integrates data on individuals and diverse populations from a variety of sources, including test results, self reported symptoms, and electronic medical record data. Federal agencies partnering with NIH include the Office of the Assistant Secretary of Health, the Biomedical Advanced Research and Development Authority, CDC, DOD, and FDA. RADx components have the following goals 1 RADx TECH quickly identify, validate, and scale up production of new technologies for point of care and laboratory COVID 19 testing 2 RADx ATP identify existing and late stage testing technologies ready to be scaled up to increase their geographic reach 3 RADx RAD support R D for innovative approaches and new applications of existing approaches to address gaps in COVID 19 testing 4 RADx UP engage with and expand COVID 19 testing for underserved and vulnerable communities and 5 RADx Data Hub coordinate COVID 19 data management needs. See Point to Point Communication for Noncentralized Clinical Management of Infectious Disease In December 2020.The U.S. Army Medical Research and Development Command USAMRDC Telemedicine and Advanced Technology Research Center TATRC launched its next generation National Emergency Tele Critical Care Network, NETCCN. It is a cloud based health information management system that can create virtual critical care wards via smartphones. TATRC developed and tested NETCCN in geographically disperse areas in an accelerated technology push over just a few months. Its goal is to significantly broaden availability of noncentralized clinical care during large scale health emergencies via point to point not hub and spoke live video and asynchronous messaging capabilities that let clinicians exchange information with and provide care to patients virtually. The trials involved care management of some 100 patients by over 200 clinicians and helpers in COVID 19 hot spots in South Dakota, Minnesota, Puerto Rico, and other locations. The NETCCN smartphone app successfully supported patients in their own homes and reduced burdens on hospitals as well as disease exposures for clinicians and patients and their families. This technology promises to have great value within the total fabric of civilian and military healthcare during a disaster. See The NETCCN app provides ability to surge anywhere to anywhere caregiving in cases of remote or widespread health crises.  1. Introduction 4 NITRD and NAIIO Supplement to the President s FY2022 Budget Still, the experience of the pandemic revealed significant gaps in knowledge, capability, and policy impacting public health that the Nation must address going forward. These include the high costs and low availability of broadband, computing, and health resources in some communities inadequate communications systems among national, state, regional, and local governments and needs for greater collaboration in nonclinical technical research e.g., on rapid testing or physiological monitoring systems and in sociological research e.g., on virus related stress or educational equity . Importantly, the gaps include inadequacies in how the Nation addresses health including mental health and related challenges equitably under normal as well as emergency conditions. Solutions include growing partnerships with businesses of all sizes and in all kinds of communities to develop and deploy the innovative health technologies, products, processes, and services that they need. NITRD Interagency Working Groups IWGs with R D programs relevant to this topic The AI R D IWG pp. 23 26 Big Data IWG pp. 50 51 Broadband R D Team part of the Large Scale Networking IWG p. 54 Computing Enabled Networked Physical Systems IWG pp. 29 31 Cyber Security and Information Assurance IWG pp. 32 34 High End Computing IWG, with its focuses on both enabling R D for high capability computing systems and high capability computing infrastructure and applications pp. 42 43 and 44 46 Health IT R D IWG pp. 59 60 Large Scale Networking IWG pp. 52 54 Privacy R D IWG pp. 35 36 and Wireless Spectrum R D IWG pp. 54 56 . 2. NITRD Coordination of R D Solutions to Equitably Address Climate Change Several NITRD member or participating agencies, such as the Departments of Defense and Energy, Environmental Protection Agency, National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration, and National Science Foundation, already have research programs underway or on the drawing boards to prioritize R D needs for alternatives to current U.S. energy use and greenhouse gas emissions patterns and to assess their impact on the Nation s and the world s climate e.g., see sidebar on page 5 . These have downstream consequences for national security, food security, economic security, and societal equity and wellbeing. As with R D coordination to understand and address the pandemic, R D coordination to address understanding, mitigating, and reversing climate change will need to be a whole of Nation undertaking, and leadership and engagement from the Federal Government will be critical. The government s efforts will benefit greatly from NITRD s experience and partnerships in IT related R D coordination in areas relevant to addressing climate change especially given the short time horizons for making a positive impact before climate change becomes significantly harder to address. For example, the Nation s depth of expertise in supercomputing and AI ML, communications, cybersecurity and software, and data analysis including for environmental sensors has long been supported by NITRD R D coordination efforts. These investments will be essential for modeling and analysis of relevant information on the status of polar ice the health of the world s complex biomes improved understanding of soil, ocean, and atmospheric conditions changes in drought and fire and storm patterns and many other climate indicators and remediations. NITRD capabilities for R D coordination and collaboration will be valuable in supporting changes in policy and practice to rapidly improve the near and long term ability of the planet and its inhabitants to thrive. NITRD and NAIIO also are helping to coordinate agency investments in the National AI Research Institutes that will address many aspects of climate change using AI see Sections 2 and 5 .  1. Introduction NITRD and NAIIO Supplement to the President s FY2022 Budget 5 Pioneering NITRD Agency Tools to Envisage and Mitigate Climate Change NITRD members of the AI, HEC, and other IWGs are already applying HPC, AI ML, and other advanced IT tools to enable breakthrough innovations in the Nation s quest to envisage and mitigate climate change. NASA e.g., Center for Climate Simulation a and NOAA e.g., Center for Satellite Applications and Research b , utilize the Geostationary Operational Environmental Satellite R series,c among other resources, to provide agency scientists and agency sponsored academic, industry, and public labs and enterprises an impressively diverse set of integrated HPC, data analysis, and visualization capabilities aimed at improving data accessibility for Earth science research and direct use by both Federal and non governmental scientists. Such capabilities provide continuous real time transmission, acquisition, and transformation of satellite data to large scale observation, modeling, analysis, and high resolution visualization of data in 2D e.g., see figure at left , 3D, and video form. Applications include disaster prediction and response for droughts, hurricanes, fires, etc. weather and climate forecasting fisheries, agriculture, and ecosystem monitoring military and defense planning economic prediction, e.g., regarding power or tourism needs and public data and information sharing and policymaking. The Air Force NASA Navy NOAA Joint Center for Satellite Data Assimilation recently demonstrated software supercontainers d for its next generation system Joint Effort for Data assimilation Integration JEDI . They are usable on computing systems ranging from laptops to supercomputers to help democratize use of sophisticated satellite data in community based open science projects. USGS s Landsat also shares its Earth observation data publicly to support local decision making for natural resources and the environment. e DOE s National Renewable Energy Laboratory NREL High Performance Computing User Facility f provides HPC capabilities to scientists and engineers working to solve complex computational and data analysis problems related to energy efficiency and cost reductions for renewable energy technologies, including wind and solar energy, energy storage, and large scale integration of renewables into the electric grid. Eagle is DOE NREL s latest high performance computing system dedicated to advancing renewable energy and energy efficiency technologies. DOE NREL engages with industry and consumers in three key energy R D and innovation areas 1. Integrated energy pathways to broaden the selection of energy generation types, renewables, storage modes, smart loads, devices, and expanded transportation electrification, all needing to work together, e.g., via AI ML managed higher and more complex electricity loads in new, more resilient energy grids. 2. Electrons to molecules to support transformation of manufacturing to produce chemicals, fuels, and other products via innovations in biocatalysis, electrocatalysis, and renewable electricity that reduce fossil fuel reliance in production of chemicals, fuels, materials, and energy storage, and drive CO2 capture conversion. 3. Circular economy for energy materials to reduce wastes in landfills and oceans and preserve resources by designing new energy systems that use sustainable materials that can be reused, recycled, and upcycled within the energy systems, including by designing enzymes that will break down discarded plastics. DOE NREL is also working on applying HPC simulation and modeling, data science, and advanced analytics aided by AI ML to understand when and how buildings g use energy and how they interact with the electric grid as a system to predict how to cost effectively achieve building related energy efficiency on a large scale. a b c d e f g Residential and commercial buildings, including their embodied carbon, contribute by some estimates as much as 40 of U.S. CO2 usage and emissions. GOES 16 nighttime Sea Surface Temperature SST composite generated from Advanced Baseline Imager ABI data on 2017 10 27.  1. Introduction 6 NITRD and NAIIO Supplement to the President s FY2022 Budget NITRD IWGs with R D programs relevant to this topic AI R D IWG pp. 23 26 Big Data IWG pp. 50 51 Computing Enabled Networked Physical Systems IWG pp. 29 31 Cyber Security and Information Assurance IWG pp. 32 34 High End Computing IWG, with focuses on enabling R D for high capability computing systems and on high capability computing infrastructure and applications pp. 42 43 and 44 46 Large Scale Networking IWG pp. 52 54 Privacy R D IWG pp. 35 36 and Wireless Spectrum R D IWG pp. 54 56 . 3. NITRD Coordination of R D for World leading Technologies and Industries of the Future The President and Congress have recognized the pivotal value to the Nation of leading the world in innovative technologies and applications that will power the industries of the future IotF . Currently, these include AI, quantum information science QIS , advanced wireless networks including fifth generation networking 5G and beyond , advanced manufacturing, and biotechnology. To varying degrees, all of these, along with vigorous national and international information sharing and coordination activities, already have proven invaluable in addressing aspects of the COVID 19 pandemic, including the highly specialized, high speed manufacturing of vaccines with digital process and quality controls at every stage. Likewise, IotF R D investments will prove invaluable in tackling climate change, as indicated above. In the broadest sense, American IotF capabilities will be essential to support the future vitality of the Nation in terms of its economic competitiveness vis à vis the rest of the world and its ability to protect and defend its borders and vital infrastructure. Just as critically, IotF R D investments will support the Nation s ability to securely and equitably provide its people with robust Internet based access to government office holders and public services to advanced remote healthcare, education, data sharing, and research capabilities and to secure cutting edge communications for business and personal needs. Modern communication devices, systems, and networks are expected to support a broad range of critical and essential services, which in turn makes resiliency an increasingly important feature in the research, design, and operations of next generation NextG sensing, communications, networking, and computing networks and systems. Innovations along such lines of inquiry require ongoing government leadership and funding partnerships that multiply available intellectual talent and investment dollars and coordination mechanisms that help maximize the effectiveness of R D and minimize duplication of research programs. NITRD IWGs with R D programs relevant to this topic The AI R D IWG pp. 23 26 Big Data IWG pp. 50 51 Computing Enabled Networked Physical Systems IWG pp. 29 31 Cyber Security and Information Assurance IWG pp. 32 34 both High End Computing IWGs pp. 42 43 and 44 46 Intelligent Robotics and Autonomous Systems IWG pp. 47 49 Large Scale Networking IWG pp. 52 54 Privacy R D IWG pp. 35 36 and Wireless Spectrum R D IWG pp. 54 56 . 4. NITRD Support for All Americans Sharing in S T Creation and Rewards NITRD s Education and Workforce Development EdW Program Component Area PCA captures Federal agency investments in IT related science, technology, engineering, and mathematics STEM education programs, internships, job training, and recruitment. All NITRD member agencies and IWGs depend on and support activities of the EdW PCA. EdW strategic priorities call for increasing, broadening, and diversifying the STEM education and workforce pipeline. However, given the complexity and urgency of the national mandate for S T to address today s health, climate, economic, national security, and equity needs, the NITRD agencies also are gearing up to actively focus on expanding racial, ethnic, gender, cultural, ability, economic, and geographic diversity within STEM and IT education opportunities, mentorships, and hiring.  1. Introduction NITRD and NAIIO Supplement to the President s FY2022 Budget 7 The near term goal is to integrate into schools, laboratories, factories, and society a larger and more diverse cadre of capable scientists, engineers, and high tech workers and consumers. Such efforts should help extend the rewards of S T innovation more equitably into communities across America. Other initiatives taking shape within the NITRD IWGs will help to address diversity, equity, and justice issues in IT research and deployment Work by the LSN Broadband team aims to make high speed Internet and linked business, healthcare, education, and civic opportunities more readily available in underserved areas of the country more data and improved computer modeling will identify areas bypassed by STEM Ed and other programs software developers aim to improve fairness in a host of AI ML algorithms, e.g., for image processing cybersecurity and privacy R D will help boost confidence in and application of IT solutions and a rising Federal commitment to support wider geographic location of S T and AI innovation hubs8 will help grow the incomes of more communities and families and broaden the inputs into S T decision making. NITRD IWGs with R D programs relevant to this topic The AI R D IWG pp. 23 26 Big Data IWG pp. 50 51 Broadband R D Team p. 54 Cyber Security and Information Assurance IWG pp. 32 34 both High End Computing IWGs pp. 42 43 and 44 46 Large Scale Networking IWG pp. 52 54 Privacy R D IWG pp. 35 36 Software Productivity, Sustainability, and Quality IWG pp. 57 58 and Wireless Spectrum R D IWG pp. 54 56 . 5. NITRD Support for the Long term Health of the U.S. S T R D Ecosystem As the President s letter to Dr. Lander underscored, global U.S. leadership in science and technology has relied for decades on a rich ecosystem of people, policies, and institutions. Revitalizing and safeguarding the long term health of this ecosystem in a rapidly changing, highly competitive world is of utmost importance to the country s future. It will require integrating S T knowledge building, policymaking, and infrastructure development measures. It will require addressing scientific, technical, security, and economic issues along with education, equity, and transparency considerations. It will take a unified effort to institutionalize integrity and renewal within the Nation s entire S T ecosystem, beginning with wide ranging dialog among all members of the experimental and computational science communities and the public. Creative, pooled funding models for infrastructure building and maintenance, and innovative, inclusive models for education and career development will be needed. Also needed will be voluntary, consensus based S T standards, active sharing of resources and tools, and continuing cross sector relationship building to foster trust and spark innovation. The Federal Government s leadership and resources will indeed continue to be vital to the long term vision and vigor of the U.S. S T ecosystem, but government partnerships with the private sector and across the full range of U.S. communities must be a consistent and dynamic part of the ecosystem. NITRD has a 30 year history of accomplishment in promoting dialog and collaboration among various S T R D stakeholders. All of the NITRD IWGs will have unique parts to play in advancing the critical R D themes of the Nation s S T ecosystem discussions and activities going forward. The sidebar on page 8 briefly describes an ambitious concept, Digital Twin Earth DTE , that relies on HPC AI masses of observational data robust cybersecurity, privacy protection, and open source software and effective data sharing and visualization to address aspects of all five of the questions President Biden posed to OSTP Director nominee Eric Lander prior to his Senate confirmation. DTE is a concept that not only U.S. scientists but researchers in other nations are working on enthusiastically the prospects are great for this kind of complex digital model of the Earth and Earth systems being an invaluable problem solving tool. 8 As an example, see  1. Introduction 8 NITRD and NAIIO Supplement to the President s FY2022 Budget Digital Twin Earth Using the Convergence of Cutting Edge HPC and IT to Build a Better Future In a 1998 speech, Vice President Al Gore called for a grassroots, multistakeholder effort to build a Digital Earth, a multiresolution, three dimensional representation of the planet into which we can embed vast quantities of geo referenced data a and to be able to work with that data. Gore lamented that the then 20 years of raw image data of Earth stored by the USGS Landsat satellite was largely unused due to the limited means to display and interact with it. Today, scientists have hugely more powerful computers and digital tools to combine and derive decision support from the myriad data collected by systems across and above the globe. The Digital Earth vision that Gore described is becoming a reality due to recent advances in IT capabilities. These include computing capacity and speed, AI and ML, modeling and simulation, imaging and visualization, data collection and privacy protection, data storage and analysis modalities, systems interoperability and metadata standards, and broadband networking and cybersecurity. The possible uses for a Digital Earth capability are countless, and many align with Administration priorities. They span high resolution weather, climate change, and climate event modeling biodiversity preservation balanced management of oceans, fisheries, and watersheds control of vector borne diseases virtual diplomacy i.e., border issues redeployment of military and first responders to areas of greatest need in a crisis and more. Along with amassing the needed data, the emerging and converging technologies noted above will be essential to enabling and sharing the extremely high resolution modeling that will allow for realizable solutions to acute Earth relevant problems. Today, Gore s vision is called Digital Twin Earth DTE after the term digital twin became widely used in the early 2000s by manufacturing, healthcare, and aerospace engineers. Some aspects of the DTE idea have been realized in virtual globe browsers, but the vision has not been achieved of a collaborative, fully global linking of systems of digital systems for Earth science and geography based decision making. NITRD member agencies e.g., NASA, NIH, NIST, NOAA, and USGS , are expanding their efforts to build and publicly share components of the DTE knowledge base, and to build in standards for security, interoperability, and trust in their widespread collaborative use.b NIST has released for public comment a set of considerations for standards for digital twin technologies.c Public geo referenced data from Federal agencies include earthdata.nasa.gov , svs.gsfc.nasa.gov , hdpulse.nimhd.nih.gov data , gis.ncdc.noaa.gov maps ncei , maps data, and among many others. U.S. industry, academia, and international partners and competitors all are pursuing construction of their own DTE systems at an ever increasing pace for both competitive and practical reasons. DTE offers unprecedented capabilities for visualizing, testing solutions to, and ultimately solving complex problems as part of humankind s path to building a better future. Although composing a Digital Twin Earth is a big thrust of many ongoing Federal research efforts, digital twins may also be conceived of the human body for purposes of personalizing medical treatment or of business or manufacturing practices for purposes of process optimization. In many ways, the digital twin concept is one of the most developed and practical examples today of the convergence of leading edge IT technologies. The potential applications and benefits are immeasurable. a Digital Earth Understanding our planet in the 21st Century, PDF . b These efforts are part of and in many ways depend on agency work to complete internal digital transformation efforts. c Image credit NASA  1. Introduction NITRD and NAIIO Supplement to the President s FY2022 Budget 9 The Crosscutting Value to IT R D of the Administration s Focus on Inclusion In his June 2, 2021, letter to the Nation upon beginning his tenure as Director of the Office of Science and Technology Policy, Eric Lander stressed the following 9 America s future depends on science and technology like never before... To succeed, America will need to draw on all of its assets chief among them, our unrivaled diversity. After all, scientific progress is about someone seeing questions or answers that no one has seen before because they bring a different lens, different experiences, different questions, different passions. Yet, science and technology have too often been unwelcoming or inaccessible to many Americans, due to their gender, race, resources, or geography. We must ensure that all Americans can participate fully, including having a voice in shaping our nation s priorities. And, we must ensure that all Americans share equally in the benefits of science and technology. It is evident today that Federal IT R D efforts must expand to involve and benefit once overlooked sectors and communities. R D to develop and deploy the groundbreaking IT systems of the future will depend on vigorously cultivating large numbers of researchers and engineers and a tech savvy citizenry and workforce excluding people is not an option. As the continuing 2020 2021 coronavirus pandemic has confirmed, innovative S T developed over decades can greatly help the Nation tackle unexpected crises as well as everyday needs however, it also showed that the Nation cannot afford for political, economic, and ethical reasons to leave any group behind. Federally supported R D has steadily democratized computing, IT, and advanced wireless communications. Now these technology efforts need to be thoughtfully integrated across the Nation. As the U.S. S T community seeks solutions that ease everyday burdens for the American people and spark new jobs and opportunities, 10 NITRD s record on coordinating HPC and IT R D of benefit to the Nation is a solid foundation on which to build greater inclusion into IT R D practices. NITRD Budget Reporting, Organizational Structures, and Activities NITRD Program Component Areas NITRD s annual budget reporting see Section 2 is organized by Program Component Area and agency to facilitate year to year budgetary and programmatic comparisons. The PCAs are categories of technical R D focus supported by NITRD member agency investments. PCAs are the major subject areas under which Federal agencies report their funding requests for the activities that the NITRD Program coordinates. The NITRD Subcommittee and the NCO Director review the NITRD PCAs annually to ensure that the NITRD Program actively addresses evolving IT R D and policy needs. For FY2022, there is one new NITRD PCA, Electronics for Networking and Information Technology ENIT . Keeping within the NITRD scope, the ENIT PCA will capture agency investments in micro and nanoelectronics R D for advancing, testing, and securing NITRD s core networking and IT silicon and non silicon hardware assets. The 11 other NITRD PCAs are the same as in FY2021. Section 3 provides full definitions of the NITRD PCAs. 9 10 advisor and nominee as director of the office of science and technology policy  1. Introduction 10 NITRD and NAIIO Supplement to the President s FY2022 Budget The 12 NITRD PCAs for FY2022 are as follows Artificial Intelligence AI R D PCA Computing Enabled Human Interaction, Communications, and Augmentation CHuman PCA Computing Enabled Networked Physical Systems CNPS PCA Cyber Security and Privacy CSP PCA Education and Workforce EdW PCA Electronics for Networking and Information Technology ENIT NEW for FY2022 Enabling R D for High Capability Computing Systems EHCS PCA High Capability Computing Infrastructure and Applications HCIA PCA Intelligent Robotics and Autonomous Systems IRAS PCA Large Scale Data Management and Analysis LSDMA PCA Large Scale Networking LSN PCA o Advanced Wireless R D AWRD sub PCA Software Productivity, Sustainability, and Quality SPSQ PCA NITRD Interagency Working Groups NITRD s Interagency Working Groups coordinate the R D planning and activities that support members PCA investments. There is a close, though not a strictly one to one match between the PCAs and IWGs see Figure 1 below and Section 3 . The NITRD IWGs, with rotating agency co chairs and support from NCO Technical Coordinators, strive to maximize Federal interagency efficiency in conducting high impact basic research, transferring discoveries to the marketplace, advancing the national IT R D infrastructure, and strengthening community R D alliances. IWGs share information and coordinate agency R D activities via monthly coordination meetings, annual planning meetings, and development of technical strategic plans. The NCO and IWG members review the IWG definitions and strategic R D priorities annually to ensure they align with the Administration s annual and ongoing priorities. A new Information Integrity R D IWG was initiated in August 2021 to provide interagency coordination on R D investments in information integrity. There were no other IWG changes for FY2022. The 12 FY2022 NITRD IWGs and subgroups are as follows Artificial Intelligence R D AI IWG o Video and Image Analytics VIA team Big Data IWG Computing Enabled Networked Physical Systems CNPS IWG Cybersecurity and Information Assurance CSIA IWG High End Computing HEC IWG Health Information Technology R D HITRD IWG Information Integrity R D IIRD IWG NEW in FY2021 Intelligent Robotics and Autonomous Systems IRAS IWG Large Scale Networking LSN IWG o Broadband Research and Development BRD team o Joint Engineering Team JET o Middleware and Grid Interagency Coordination MAGIC team Privacy R D Privacy IWG Software Productivity, Sustainability, and Quality SPSQ IWG Wireless Spectrum R D WSRD IWG o Advanced Wireless Test Platform team  1. Introduction NITRD and NAIIO Supplement to the President s FY2022 Budget 11 Figure 1 pictures the relationships of the IWGs to the PCAs in which their investments are reported. Figure 1. Relationships between the NITRD IWGs and PCAs for FY2022. Notes The HITRD IWG is not affiliated with a single PCA, and the Information Integrity R D IWG has not been affiliated with a PCA since its initiation in August 2021. The CHuman, EdW, and ENIT PCAs do not have coordinating IWGs agencies that invest in R D in these areas currently do so within other IWGs. NITRD IWG Roles in Furthering Public Private R D Partnerships The IWGs work throughout the year to promote public private engagement and partnerships Plan, hold, and report on cross community and cross sector technical workshops. Present and hold meetings at national and international technical symposiums such as the International Conference for High Performance Computing, Networking, Storage, and Analysis. Compile, publish, and update for public use on nitrd.gov resource guides and inventories of Federal R D programs, e.g., in Broadband, High end Computing, Smart Cities, Wireless Spectrum, and STEM education and internships. Review and update R D strategic plans, as mandated by Congress or as IWG agency members and participants determine there is a need these plans serve as guides for not only the Federal IT R D community but also for the academic and industrial IT R D communities. NITRD IWG Coordination with NSTC S T Committees NITRD s interdisciplinary R D agenda creates natural synergies between its IWG efforts and other efforts of the NSTC enterprise, including those of the Committees and Subcommittees listed below Committee on Environment, Subcommittee on Global Change Research Committee on National and Homeland Security o Special Cybersecurity Operations Research and Engineering Subcommittee o Subcommittee on Microelectronics Leadership o Subcommittee on Resilience S T Committee on Science, Subcommittee on Quantum Information Science Committee on STEM Education, Federal Coordination in STEM Education Subcommittee, Computational Literacy Interagency Working Group Committee on Technology o Future Advanced Computing Ecosystem FACE Subcommittee o Machine Learning and Artificial Intelligence MLAI Subcommittee o Nanoscale Science, Engineering, and Technology Subcommittee Select Committee on Artificial Intelligence  1. Introduction 12 NITRD and NAIIO Supplement to the President s FY2022 Budget For FY2022, the NITRD Program anticipates greater involvement with many of the NSTC S T committees, and greater focus on data and equity issues in creation and delivery of digital services. NITRD IWG interactions with NSTC and other national bodies in FY2021 into FY2022 include The NITRD AI IWG, with the NSTC Select Committee on AI and the MLAI Subcommittee, coordinated public private efforts to examine the roles of AI vis à vis cloud computing.11 They are currently examining how AI can improve U.S. competitiveness in advanced manufacturing. The NITRD CNPS, LSN, and WSRD IWGs were instrumental in 2020 in organizing and capturing efforts by the National Security Council, National Economic Council, and many Federal agencies, with public input, to devise the R D sections of the National Strategy to Secure 5G Implementation Plan.12 The NITRD HEC IWG and the NSTC FACE Subcommittee coordinated interagency efforts to write a national strategic plan for Pioneering the Future Advanced Computing Ecosystem.13 They are now completing a FACE implementation plan and consolidating ideas for a National Strategic Computing Reserve, a coalition of experts and providers who could quickly provide computational resources in emergencies. 2020 Review of NITRD by the President s Council of Advisors on Science and Technology Congressional statutes require that the NITRD Program undergo periodic review by the Administration for efficacy. The most recent President s Council of Advisors on Science and Technology PCAST review of NITRD was published in January 2021.14 The PCAST found that, overall, the NITRD Program continues to be a reliable, effective mechanism for coordinating interagency advanced computing, networking, and IT R D efforts to meet national needs. Among its recommendations, PCAST encouraged the Program to better communicate when and how its program focus areas and investments change to meet evolving needs. Other PCAST recommendations include instituting measures to improve the pace and consistency of NITRD efforts to maintain competitiveness with foreign efforts in networking and IT prioritizing IT R D in industries of the future in such fields as AI, QIS, advanced wireless networks, advanced manufacturing, and biotechnology initiating a structure to coordinate R D in microelectronics and expanding Federal agencies coordination and integration efforts in education and workforce development in IT relevant STEM fields. The NITRD NCO is working with the NITRD Subcommittee to respond effectively to these recommendations. Structure of this Supplement Section 2 provides budget data for NITRD agencies R D investments made in FY2020 and enacted in FY2021 as well as supplementals , and requests for the President s FY2022 Budget in the 12 NITRD PCAs Table 1 . It also provides breakouts of agency budgets that support AI R D Table 2 , the National AI Research Institutes led by NSF and other agencies Tables 3 4 , and advanced wireless networking R D Table 5 . A budget analysis subsection highlights changes of greater than 10 million between the FY2021 enacted budgets and FY2022 requests. Sections 3 and 4 describe the major R D priorities and key activities and programs reported by NITRD agencies under the PCAs and coordinated by the IWGs.15 Section 5 lists and describes the National AI Research Institutes. A list of abbreviations follows Section 5. 11 12 13 14 15 Due to space limitations, not all agency programs are listed in the Key Programs and Coordination Activities sections of the PCA and IWG pages. Also, IWG agencies key programs are listed under only one strategic priority, but they often address more than one priority. Program titles are shown in title case, whereas program types are shown in sentence case.   NITRD and NAIIO Supplement to the President s FY2022 Budget 13 2. Agency NITRD and NAIIO Related R D Investments, FYs 2020 2022 This section reports NITRD R D budgets by PCA and agency, including overall Federal IT related R D investments Table 1 and R D investments in three high priority areas Artificial Intelligence R D Table 2 , the National Artificial Intelligence Institutes Tables 3 and 4, as mandated by the National Artificial Intelligence Initiative Act ,16 and Advanced Wireless Networks AWN R D Table 5 . Tables 1 5 provide agencies FY2020 actual and supplemental R D investments, FY2021 enacted and supplemental budgets,17 and FY2022 budget requests. A budget analysis section following the tables describes changes of investment greater than 10 million, by agency, between the FY2021 enacted budgets and the FY2022 President s Budget Request. Additional NITRD R D investment information for FY2002 FY2022 is available at Overview As Table 1 shows, the President s overall FY2022 budget request for Federal agencies NITRD related R D is 7.8 billion an increase of approximately 19.6 percent compared to the 6.5 billion requested for FY2021. The NITRD agencies requested nondefense investment in AI R D for FY2022 Table 2 is 1.7 billion, an increase of approximately 11.2 percent compared to the 1.5 billion requested for nondefense AI R D for FY2021. All AI Institutes are requesting a total of 108.3 million for FY2022, including NSF, DHS, USDA NIFA, Department of the Air Force DAF , and VA investments Tables 4 5 . Agencies budget requests for FY2022 AWN R D Table 5 total 232 million, an increase of approximately 22.8 percent compared to the 189 million requested for AWN R D for FY2021. Charts 1 and 2 below show percentages of the total NITRD budget request by PCA and by agency. Budget Charts 1. FY2022 Budget Request, as percentages of the total NITRD request, by PCA See the Abbreviations list or p. 10 for spellings of PCA acronyms and p. ii for spellings of agency acronyms. 2. FY2022 Budget Request, as percentages of the total NITRD request, by agency Other AHRQ, DHS, DOE NNSA, DOI, DOT, EPA, FDA, NASA, NIJ, NIOSH, NOAA, NTIA, Treas FCEN, USDA, VA 16 The NAIIA National AI Research Institutes are predominantly organized by NSF however, DAF and VA also fund AI Institutes. 17 FY2020 Supplemental estimates reported by DOD, NIH, and NSF are based on funding from the Coronavirus Preparedness and Response Supplemental Appropriations Act, 2020 the Families First Coronavirus Response Act the Coronavirus Aid, Relief, and Economic Security Act and the Paycheck Protection Program and Health Care Enhancement Act. FY2021 Supplemental estimates reported by DOD, NASA, NIH, and VA include supplemental appropriations and funding provided in the American Rescue Plan.  2. Agency NITRD and NAIIO Related R D Investments, FYs 2020 2022 14 NITRD and NAIIO Supplement to the President s FY2022 Budget Table 1. Agency Budgets by NITRD PCA, FYs 2020 2022 p. 1 of 2 FY2020 Budgets, Actual Supplemental FY2021 Budgets, Enacted Supplemental and FY2022 Budget Requests in millions a Agency b Fiscal Year a 12 NITRD Program Component Areas Totals e Agency b Fiscal Year a AI c CHuman CNPS CSP EdW ENIT d EHCS HCIA IRAS LSDMA LSN SPSQ Totals e AHRQ FY20 0.0 16.5 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 16.5 AHRQ FY21 0.0 16.3 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 16.3 AHRQ FY22 0.0 16.3 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 16.3 DARPAf,g FY20 10.0 0.0 262.9 0.0 0.0 5.1 0.0 0.0 31.9 65.7 0.0 375.6 DARPA e, f FY21 9.9 0.0 236.2 0.0 0.0 5.1 0.0 0.0 35.2 59.2 0.0 345.5 DARPA e, f FY22 0.0 0.0 237.1 0.0 0.0 5.1 0.0 0.0 30.4 32.9 0.0 305.5 DHS FY20 34.5 0.0 8.6 27.0 1.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 2.7 4.5 16.8 0.0 95.1 DHS FY21 31.4 0.0 6.5 26.9 1.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 5.7 1.6 12.5 0.0 85.6 DHS FY22 32.7 0.0 10.2 55.4 1.0 4.0 0.0 0.0 4.8 2.8 3.0 0.0 113.9 DOD f,g FY20 168.9 36.3 225.0 76.9 81.7 47.6 279.7 148.6 144.9 196.0 60.2 1,465.8 DOD f,g FY20 S 0.0 0.0 4.9 0.0 0.0 7.9 0.0 0.0 2.5 10.9 0.0 26.2 DOD f,g FY21 161.1 30.2 208.9 80.0 80.6 50.6 272.4 106.3 169.3 184.6 60.6 1,404.7 DOD f,g FY21 S 0.0 0.0 9.9 0.0 0.0 9.9 0.0 0.0 0.0 26.6 0.0 46.4 DOD f,g FY22 155.2 26.5 175.4 81.2 82.3 39.3 268.8 96.5 164.1 146.7 72.5 1,308.4 DOE h FY20 89.9 0.0 1.2 30.0 29.0 40.0 71.1 641.7 17.7 25.7 90.0 0.0 1036.2 DOE g FY21 149.7 0.0 0.0 32.3 30.3 40.0 131.1 655.6 16.0 8.9 91.3 0.0 1,155.2 DOE g FY22 124.8 0.0 0.0 46.1 34.0 40.0 126.9 720.0 0.4 0.0 94.0 0.0 1,186.1 DOE NNSAh FY20 20.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 40.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 60.0 DOE NNSAh FY21 25.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 12.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 37.0 DOE NNSAh FY22 27.7 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 24.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 51.7 DOI FY20 6.5 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 6.5 DOI FY21 8.5 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 8.5 DOI FY22 13.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 13.0 DOT FY20 10.0 0.0 0.9 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.5 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.7 12.1 DOT FY21 11.1 0.0 1.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 2.5 0.8 0.0 0.4 15.8 DOT FY22 11.3 0.0 1.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.5 0.3 0.0 0.0 13.1 EPA FY20 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 3.5 3.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 6.5 EPA FY21 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 3.5 3.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 6.5 EPA FY22 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 3.3 3.5 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 6.8 FDA FY20 40.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 40.0 FDA FY21 46.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 46.0 FDA FY22 50.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 50.0 NASA FY20 2.0 0.0 1.5 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.4 66.3 24.7 0.0 0.0 1.5 96.3 NASA FY21 2.9 0.0 1.8 0.0 0.0 0.0 2.2 65.4 22.2 0.0 0.0 1.8 96.2 NASA FY22 2.9 0.0 1.8 0.0 0.0 0.0 3.8 83.7 24.9 0.0 0.0 1.8 118.8 NIH FY20 112.3 369.4 31.7 7.0 55.9 0.0 64.8 314.1 15.5 626.3 41.5 186.2 1,824.7 NIH FY20 S 0.8 6.0 0.0 0.0 0.3 0.0 0.2 1.2 0.0 2.2 0.0 2.0 12.7 NIH FY21 117.6 376.3 32.3 7.2 56.4 0.0 65.6 321.0 15.7 637.6 42.6 189.7 1,862.0 NIH FY21 S 0.1 7.2 0.0 0.0 0.2 0.0 0.0 0.5 0.0 1.4 0.0 1.6 11.0 NIH FY22 121.8 413.8 34.3 7.4 58.7 0.0 70.0 334.9 16.8 670.3 43.6 199.2 1,970.8 NIJ FY20 11.5 0.7 0.0 0.4 1.5 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 1.3 0.0 0.0 15.4 NIJ FY21 11.5 0.7 0.0 0.4 1.5 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 1.5 0.0 0.0 15.6 NIJ FY22 11.5 0.7 0.0 0.4 1.5 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 1.5 0.0 0.0 15.6 NIOSH FY20 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 1.3 0.0 0.0 0.0 1.3 NIOSH FY21 3.8 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 3.3 0.0 0.0 0.0 7.0 NIOSH FY22 3.8 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 3.3 0.0 0.0 0.0 7.0 NIST FY20 14.9 13.3 12.8 81.5 6.8 0.0 6.7 9.8 10.8 15.9 20.0 2.3 194.8 NIST FY21 25.1 14.4 13.8 84.4 6.9 0.0 9.1 9.6 11.4 16.9 20.9 3.3 215.8 NIST FY22 40.1 14.4 13.8 84.4 6.9 0.0 9.1 9.6 11.4 16.9 20.9 3.3 230.8  2. Agency NITRD and NAIIO Related R D Investments, FYs 2020 2022 NITRD and NAIIO Supplement to the President s FY2022 Budget 15 Table 1. Agency Budgets by NITRD PCA, FYs 2020 2022 p. 2 of 2 FY2020 Budgets, Actual Supplemental FY2021 Budgets, Enacted Supplemental and FY2022 Budget Requests in millions a Agency b Fiscal Year a 12 NITRD Program Component Areas Totals e Agency b Fiscal Year a AI c CHuman CNPS CSP EdW ENIT d EHCS HCIA IRAS LSDMA LSN SPSQ Totals e NOAA FY20 0.8 0.2 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 63.0 0.0 0.0 4.3 3.7 71.9 NOAA FY21 1.2 0.2 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 65.5 0.0 0.0 4.3 3.7 74.8 NOAA FY22 1.2 0.2 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 75.5 0.0 0.0 4.3 3.7 84.8 NSF FY20 315.4 96.1 77.1 105.5 98.8 60.6 171.4 206.8 45.7 203.8 179.3 65.9 1,626.2 NSF FY20 S 4.2 2.4 4.2 1.5 1.5 0.0 0.4 0.2 0.1 3.9 2.2 0.9 21.3 NSF FY21 357.6 93.7 74.4 104.6 98.5 39.7 166.2 189.1 44.8 184.4 178.3 66.4 1,597.4 NSF FY22 497.2 107.6 141.5 119.9 125.2 106.4 177.9 204.4 63.4 249.6 217.9 80.8 2,091.5 NTIA FY20 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 6.2 0.0 6.2 NTIA FY21 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 9.2 0.0 9.2 NTIA FY22 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 10.0 0.0 10.0 Treas FCEN FY20 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 Treas FCEN FY21 0.5 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.5 Treas FCEN FY22 0.8 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.8 USDA FY20 128.9 0.0 1.2 0.0 0.1 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.2 0.1 0.0 0.0 130.5 USDA FY21 145.2 0.0 6.2 0.0 0.1 0.0 0.0 0.0 5.2 1.0 0.0 0.0 157.7 USDA FY22 145.2 0.0 6.2 0.0 0.1 0.0 0.0 0.0 5.2 1.0 0.0 0.0 157.7 VA FY20 10.9 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 10.9 VA FY21 17.9 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 17.9 VA FY21 S 0.5 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.5 VA FY22 24.7 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 24.7 TOTALS e FY20 797.5 675.1 171.2 739.3 270.0 182.3 411.1 1,584.3 267.2 1,054.4 619.8 320.4 7,092.7 TOTALS e FY20 S 5.0 8.4 4.2 6.4 1.8 0.0 8.5 1.4 0.1 8.6 13.1 2.9 60.2 TOTALS e FY21 954.9 672.6 166.2 700.9 274.7 160.3 445.4 1,581.6 233.0 1,057.2 602.9 325.8 7,175.4 TOTALS e FY21 S 0.6 7.2 0.0 9.9 0.2 0.0 9.9 67.7 0.0 1.4 26.6 1.6 57.9 TOTALS e FY22 1,108.5 708.3 235.3 726.0 308.5 232.7 459.3 1,700.4 227.0 1,136.9 573.3 361.2 7,777.3 Budget Table 1 Notes a. FY20 FY2020 actual budgets FY20 S FY2020 supplemental budgets FY21 FY2021 enacted budgets FY21 S FY2021 supplemental budgets and FY22 FY2022 proposed budgets. The budget supplemental figures for FY2021 and FY2022 have not been used to calculate changes between the FY2021 and FY2022 budget numbers. Please also see footnote 17 on p. 13. b. Agency sub departments and offices that reported budgets are as noted here see the Abbreviations list at the end of this document DHS CG, DHS CWMD, DHS S T, and DHS TSA DOD DTRA, MDA, Military Services research organizations, and OSD DOE DOE AITO, DOE ARPA E, DOE CESER, DOE EERE, DOE FE, DOE NE, DOE OE, and DOE SC DOE NNSA Defense Nuclear Nonproliferation, and Defense Programs DOI DOI BSEE, DOI USBR, and USGS DOT FAA, FHWA, FMCSA, FRA, FTA, and PHMSA NASA Aeronautics, Exploration Technology, and Office of Science NOAA NOAA ORF and NOAA PAC NSF Education and Human Resources, and Research and Related Activities USDA ARS and NIFA. NARA has no active R D program investments to report for these years. c. The AI budget reported under the AI PCA is not the complete AI budget refer also to Tables 3 and 4 and the Budget Analysis at the end of this section. d. The Electronics for Networking and Information Technology ENIT PCA is new for FY2022. e. Totals might not sum exactly due to rounding. f. DARPA is a DOD research organization, but it reports its budgets separately from the DOD Services research organizations and the Office of the Secretary of Defense OSD . g. DARPA and DOD budget figures for direct AI R D are not publicly available. See Table 2 for DOD investments in AI R D under other PCAs. h. The DOE NNSA budget is listed separately from that of other DOE offices.  2. Agency NITRD and NAIIO Related R D Investments, FYs 2020 2022 16 NITRD and NAIIO Supplement to the President s FY2022 Budget Table 2. Agency Budgets by NITRD PCA for AI R D,a FYs 2020 2022 p. 1 of 3 FY2020 Budgets, Actual Supplemental FY2021 Budgets, Enacted Supplemental and FY2022 Budget Requests in millions b Agency a,c Fiscal Year b 12 NITRD Program Component Areas Totals a,g Agency a,c Fiscal Year b AI d,e CHuman CNPS CSP EdW ENIT f EHCS e HCIA IRAS LSDMA LSN SPSQ Totals a,g DHS CWMD FY20 2.4 0.0 1.7 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 4.5 0.5 0.0 9.1 DHS CWMD FY21 2.7 0.0 1.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 1.6 0.5 0.0 5.8 DHS CWMD FY22 1.1 0.0 0.5 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 1.3 0.0 0.0 2.9 DHS S T FY20 25.1 0.0 0.0 20.8 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 45.9 DHS S T FY21 21.7 0.0 0.0 20.1 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 41.8 DHS S T FY22 24.6 0.0 0.0 42.9 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 67.5 DHS TSA FY20 7.0 0.0 0.0 0.4 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 7.4 DHS TSA FY21 7.0 0.0 0.0 0.4 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 7.4 DHS TSA FY22 7.0 0.0 0.0 0.4 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 7.4 DOD OSD a FY20 0.7 1.0 15.4 9.7 70.3 15.9 2.1 3.4 10.1 6.2 8.2 143.1 DOD OSD a FY21 3.0 0.4 12.5 10.2 72.1 6.0 1.5 2.5 7.6 8.2 7.8 131.9 DOD OSD a FY22 0.6 0.0 4.3 0.5 63.4 5.7 0.0 0.0 4.3 3.5 0.2 82.5 DOD USAF a FY20 5.0 0.0 0.1 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 29.9 0.1 0.1 0.0 35.3 DOD USAF a FY20 S 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.1 DOD USAF a FY21 5.0 0.0 0.1 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 33.8 0.1 0.1 0.0 39.1 DOD USAF a FY21 S 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.1 0.0 0.1 DOD USAF a FY22 4.9 0.0 0.1 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 31.4 0.2 0.1 0.0 36.8 DOE AITO FY20 2.5 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 2.5 DOE AITO FY21 2.5 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 2.5 DOE AITO FY22 1.5 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 1.5 DOE ARPA E FY20 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 DOE ARPA E FY21 0.5 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.5 DOE ARPA E FY22 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 DOE EERE FY20 51.2 0.0 1.2 25.0 0.0 0.0 3.2 0.0 1.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 81.6 DOE EERE FY21 47.4 0.0 0.0 27.3 0.0 0.0 6.0 0.0 11.5 0.0 0.0 0.0 92.2 DOE EERE FY22 41.3 0.0 0.0 11.1 0.0 0.0 6.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 58.4 DOE FE FY20 9.9 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 9.9 DOE FE FY21 27.1 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 27.1 DOE FE FY22 10.2 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 10.2 DOE NE FY20 1.4 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.2 0.0 0.0 0.0 1.6 DOE NE FY21 1.6 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.5 0.0 0.0 0.0 2.1 DOE NE FY22 1.9 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.4 0.0 0.0 0.0 2.3 DOE NNSAe FY20 20.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 20.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 40.0 DOE NNSAe FY21 25.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 25.0 DOE NNSAe FY22 27.7 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 27.7 DOE OE FY20 5.6 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 5.6 DOE OE FY21 5.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 5.0 DOE OE FY22 3.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 3.0 DOE SC FY20 19.2 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 9.7 37.3 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 66.2 DOE SC FY21 65.6 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 14.9 43.9 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 124.4 DOE SC FY22 66.8 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 16.5 45.4 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 128.6 DOI BSEE FY20 0.6 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.6 DOI BSEE FY21 1.1 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 1.1 DOI BSEE FY22 0.2 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.2 DOI USBR FY20 0.6 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.6 DOI USBR FY21 0.3 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.3 DOI USBR FY22 0.1 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.1 DOI USGS FY20 5.3 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 5.3 DOI USGS FY21 7.1 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 7.1 DOI USGS FY22 12.7 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 12.7 DOT FAA FY20 3.3 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 3.3 DOT FAA FY21 5.3 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 5.3 DOT FAA FY22 5.8 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 5.8  2. Agency NITRD and NAIIO Related R D Investments, FYs 2020 2022 NITRD and NAIIO Supplement to the President s FY2022 Budget 17 Table 2. Agency Budgets by NITRD PCA for AI R D,a FYs 2020 2022 p. 2 of 3 FY2020 Budgets, Actual Supplemental FY2021 Budgets, Enacted Supplemental and FY2022 Budget Requests in millions b Agency a,c Fiscal Yearb 12 NITRD Program Component Areas Totals a,g Agency a, b Fiscal Year b AI d,e CHuman CNPS CSP EdW ENIT f EHCS e HCIA IRAS LSDMA LSN SPSQ Totals a,g DOT FHWA FY20 1.8 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 1.8 DOT FHWA FY21 2.4 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 2.4 DOT FHWA FY22 2.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 2.0 DOT FMCSA FY20 0.2 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.2 DOT FMCSA FY21 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 DOT FMCSA FY22 0.4 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.4 DOT FRA FY20 3.2 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 3.2 DOT FRA FY21 2.3 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 2.3 DOT FRA FY22 3.1 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 3.1 DOT FTA FY20 0.8 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.8 DOT FTA FY21 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 DOT FTA FY22 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 DOT PHMSA FY20 0.8 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.8 DOT PHMSA FY21 1.2 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 1.2 DOT PHMSA FY22 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 FDA FY20 40.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 40.0 FDA FY21 46.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 46.0 FDA FY22 50.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 50.0 NASA Aero. c FY20 2.0 0.0 0.9 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.9 3.8 NASA Aero. c FY21 2.9 0.0 1.1 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 1.1 5.0 NASA Aero. c FY22 2.9 0.0 1.1 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 1.1 5.0 NASA Science FY20 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.4 3.8 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 4.2 NASA Science FY21 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.4 1.2 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 1.6 NASA Science FY22 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.5 1.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 1.5 NIH FY20 112.3 67.6 3.6 2.3 4.9 0.0 23.2 17.9 2.5 60.1 3.2 26.8 324.4 NIH FY20 S 0.8 3.5 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 4.3 NIH FY21 117.6 68.9 3.7 2.3 4.9 0.0 23.5 18.3 2.6 61.2 3.3 27.3 333.6 NIH FY21 S 0.1 4.2 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 4.3 NIH FY22 121.8 75.7 3.9 2.4 5.1 0.0 25.1 19.1 2.7 64.3 3.4 28.7 352.2 NIJ FY20 11.5 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 1.1 0.0 0.0 12.6 NIJ FY21 11.5 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 11.5 NIJ FY22 11.5 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 11.5 NIOSH FY20 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 NSH FY21 3.8 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 3.8 NIOSH FY22 3.8 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 3.8 NIST FY20 14.9 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 1.7 0.0 3.8 0.0 0.4 0.0 20.8 NIST FY21 25.1 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 2.3 0.0 4.0 0.0 0.4 0.0 31.8 NIST FY22 40.1 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 2.4 0.0 4.0 0.0 0.4 0.0 46.9 NOAA ORF FY20 0.8 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.7 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 1.5 NOAA ORF FY21 1.1 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 1.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 2.1 NOAA ORF FY22 1.1 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 1.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 2.1 NOAA PAC FY20 0.1 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.1 0.1 NOAA PAC FY21 0.1 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.1 0.1 NOAA PAC FY22 0.1 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.1 0.1 NSF FY20 315.4 43.0 31.2 26.9 11.5 5.4 13.5 17.4 45.7 55.6 23.1 3.6 592.4 NSF FY20 S 4.2 0.5 0.2 0.5 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.1 0.7 0.0 0.0 6.3 NSF FY21 357.6 33.4 25.1 25.8 8.7 3.6 10.6 14.4 37.3 46.6 15.5 3.3 582.0 NSF FY22 497.2 32.1 21.5 22.4 7.0 2.9 9.2 13.9 32.6 41.9 9.2 2.7 692.6 Treas. FCEN FY20 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 Treas. FCEN FY21 0.5 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.5 Treas. FCEN FY22 0.8 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.8 USDA ARS FY20 18.7 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 18.7 USDA ARS FY21 21.3 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 21.3 USDA ARS FY22 21.3 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 21.3  2. Agency NITRD and NAIIO Related R D Investments, FYs 2020 2022 18 NITRD and NAIIO Supplement to the President s FY2022 Budget Table 2. Agency Budgets by NITRD PCA for AI R D,a FYs 2020 2022 p. 3 of 3 FY2020 Budgets, Actual Supplemental FY2021 Budgets, Enacted Supplemental and FY2022 Budget Requests in millions b Agency a,c Fiscal Yearb 12 NITRD Program Component Areas Totals a,g Agency a, b Fiscal Year b AI d,e CHuman CNPS CSP EdW ENIT f EHCS e HCIA IRAS LSDMA LSN SPSQ Totals a,g USDA NIFA FY20 110.2 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 110.2 USDA NIFA FY21 123.9 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 123.9 USDA NIFA FY22 123.9 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 123.9 VA FY20 10.9 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 10.9 VA FY21 17.9 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 17.9 FY21 S 0.5 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.5 VA FY22 24.7 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 24.7 TOTALS g FY20 797.5 116.3 39.7 90.9 26.0 75.7 87.7 79.3 86.5 131.6 33.5 39.6 1,604.4 TOTALS g FY20 S 5.0 4.0 0.2 0.5 0.0 0.0 0.1 0.0 0.1 0.7 0.0 0.0 10.7 TOTALS g FY21 954.9 110.2 31.2 88.6 23.7 75.8 63.7 80.4 92.1 117.1 28.0 39.6 1,705.4 TOTALS g FY21 S 0.6 4.2 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.1 0.0 4.9 TOTALS g FY22 1,108.5 113.3 27.0 83.6 12.6 66.3 65.3 80.4 71.0 112.1 16.6 32.8 1,789.5 Nondefense TOTALS g FY20 797.5 110.6 38.7 75.4 16.3 5.4 71.8 77.1 53.2 121.4 27.2 31.4 1,426.0 Nondefense TOTALS g FY20 S 5.0 4.0 0.2 0.5 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.1 0.7 0.0 0.0 10.6 Nondefense TOTALS g FY21 954.9 102.3 30.8 75.9 13.6 3.6 57.7 78.8 55.8 109.5 19.7 31.7 1,534.4 Nondefense TOTALS g FY21 S 0.6 4.2 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 4.8 Nondefense TOTALS g FY22 1,108.5 107.8 27.0 79.2 12.1 2.9 59.6 80.4 39.6 107.6 12.9 32.5 1,670.2 AI Budget Table 2 Notes a. DARPA and DOD direct AI R D investments are not publicly available DOD has reported AI R D investments in PCAs other than AI. The table shows totals for all nondefense investments and for indirect defense investments in AI. b. FY20 FY2020 enacted budgets FY20 S FY2020 supplemental budgets FY21 FY2021 enacted budgets FY21 S FY2021 supplemental budgets and FY22 FY2022 proposed budgets. The budget supplemental figures for FY2021 and FY2022 have not been used to calculate changes between the FY2021 and FY2022 budget numbers. Please also see footnote 17 on p. 13. c. For full names of agency subcomponents departments and offices , please see the Abbreviations list at the end of this document. NASA Aero. refers to NASA aeronautics programs. d. 1 Examples of AI R D investments reported under the AI PCA are R D on general methods for machine vision primarily machine learning cybersecurity challenges unique to AI, e.g., ability to exploit flaws in an AI system s goals algorithms for computational linguistics and neuromorphic computing architectures or chips optimized for neural nets. 2 Examples of AI investments reported in other PCAs are R D on robots reported in IRAS the data analysis and management ecosystem reported in LSDMA broad issues of human machine interaction reported in CHuman and cybersecurity research reported in CSP and general neuromorphic computing reported in EHCS . e. DOE NNSA Defense Programs reported AI R D investments in the EHCS PCA. f. The Electronics for Networking and Information Technology ENIT PCA is new for FY2022. g. Totals might not sum exactly due to rounding.  2. Agency NITRD and NAIIO Related R D Investments, FYs 2020 2022 NITRD and NAIIO Supplement to the President s FY2022 Budget 19 Table 3. Agency Budgets for NSF Led National AI Research Institutes, FYs 2020 2022 a p. 1 of 2 FY2020 Budgets, Actual FY2021 Enacted Budgets and FY2022 Budget Requests in millions Institutes are Listed by Theme in Alphabetic Order not yet initiated in FY2020 INSTITUTE NAMES year launched Fiscal Year b NSF DHS S T DOT c USDA NIFA TOTALS d Theme AI and Advanced Cyberinfrastructure AI Institute for Intelligent Cyberinfrastructure with FY20 Computational Learning in the Environment ICICLE 2021 FY21 12.0 12.0 ICICLE 2021 FY22 0.0 0.0 Theme AI Augmented Learning AI Institute for Adult Learning and Online Education FY20 ALOE 2021 FY21 3.7 3.7 ALOE 2021 FY22 3.7 3.7 AI Institute for Engaged Learning 2021 FY20 AI Institute for Engaged Learning 2021 FY21 4.0 4.0 AI Institute for Engaged Learning 2021 FY22 3.9 3.9 AI Institute for Student AI Teaming 2020 FY20 4.0 4.0 AI Institute for Student AI Teaming 2020 FY21 4.0 4.0 AI Institute for Student AI Teaming 2020 FY22 4.0 4.0 Theme AI Driven Innovation in Agriculture and the Food System AI Institute for Agricultural AI for Transforming Workforce FY20 Decision Support Ag AID 2021 FY21 4.0 4.0 Ag AID 2021 FY22 4.0 4.0 AI Institute for Future Agricultural Resilience, Management, FY20 3.8 3.8 Sustainability AI FARMS 2020 FY21 4.0 4.0 AI FARMS 2020 FY22 4.0 4.0 AI Institute for Next generation Food Systems AIFS 2020 FY20 4.2 4.2 AIFS 2020 FY21 4.0 4.0 AIFS 2020 generation Food Systems 2020 FY22 4.0 4.0 AI Institute for Resilient Agriculture AIIRA 2021 FY20 AIIRA 2021 FY21 4.0 4.0 AIIRA 2021 FY22 4.0 4.0 Theme AI for Accelerating Molecular Synthesis and Manufacturing AI Institute for Molecular Discovery, Synthetic Strategy, FY20 7.5 7.5 Manufacturing Molecule Maker Lab 2020 FY21 0.5 0.5 Molecule Maker Lab 2020 FY22 4.0 4.0 Theme AI for Advances in Optimization AI Institute for Advances in Optimization AI4Opt 2021 FY20 AI4Opt 2021 FY21 4.3 4.3 AI4Opt 2021 FY22 5.5 5.5 AI Institute for Learning Enabled Optimization at Scale FY20 TILOS 2021 FY21 3.1 3.1 TILOS 2021 FY22 3.9 3.9 Theme AI for Discovery in Physics AI Institute for Artificial Intelligence and Fundamental FY20 4.0 4.0 Interactions 2020 FY21 4.0 4.0 AI and Fundamental Interactions 2020 FY22 4.0 4.0 Theme AI in Computer and Network Systems AI Institute for Edge Computing Leveraging FY20 Next generation Networks Athena 2021 FY21 4.0 0.5 4.5 Athena 2021 FY22 4.0 4.0 AI Institute for Future Edge Networks and Distributed FY20 Intelligence AI EDGE 2021 FY21 3.8 0.4 4.2 AI EDGE 2021 FY22 3.9 3.9 Theme AI in Dynamic Systems AI Institute for Dynamic Systems 2021 FY20 AI Institute for Dynamic Systems 2021 FY21 4.0 0.5 4.5 AI Institute for Dynamic Systems 2021 FY22 4.5 4.5  2. Agency NITRD and NAIIO Related R D Investments, FYs 2020 2022 20 NITRD and NAIIO Supplement to the President s FY2022 Budget Table 3. Agency Budgets for NSF Led National AI Research Institutes, FYs 2020 2022 a p. 2 of 2 FY2020 Budgets, Actual FY2021 Enacted Budgets and FY2022 Budget Requests in millions Institutes are Listed by Theme in Alphabetic Order not yet initiated in FY2020 INSTITUTE NAMES year launched Fiscal Year b NSF DHS S T DOT c USDA NIFA TOTALS d Theme Foundations of Machine Learning AI Institute for Foundations of Machine Learning FY20 4.9 4.9 2020 Foundations of Machine Learning FY21 3.6 3.6 Foundations of Machine Learning 2020 FY22 3.6 3.6 Theme Human AI Interaction and Collaboration AI Institute for Collaborative Assistance and Responsive FY20 Interaction for Networked Groups AI CARING 2021 FY21 2.8 2.8 AI CARING 2021 FY22 3.9 3.9 Theme Trustworthy AI AI Institute for Research on Trustworthy Artificial Intelligence in Weather, Climate, and Coastal Oceanography FY20 5.2 5.2 Also called AI for Environmental Sciences AI2ES 2020 FY21 3.2 3.2 AI2ES 2020 FY22 3.2 3.2 TOTALS d FY20 25.6 0.0 0.0 8.0 33.6 TOTALS d FY21 57.0 1.4 0.0 16.0 74.4 TOTALS d FY22 52.1 0.0 0.0 16.0 68.1 AI Research Institutes Budget Table 3 Notes a. FY 2020 was the first year of the AI Institutes, following the 2019 Executive Order 13859 announcing the American AI Initiative. b. FY20 FY2020 actual budgets FY21 FY2021 enacted budgets FY22 FY2022 proposed budgets. c. DOT has an Interagency Agreement with NSF to support the AI Institutes Program it has obligated and committed funds under the agreement that have not yet been applied to a specific Institute. d. Totals might not sum exactly due to rounding. Industry and other private partners will contribute to some AI Institutes see Section 5 . Table 4. Other Federally Funded AI Institute Budgets, FYs 2020 2022 FY2020 Actual Budgets FY2021 Enacted Budgets and FY2022 Budget Requests in millions NAMES OF OTHER AGENCIES INSTITUTES year launched Fiscal Year TOTALS a DAF b MIT Massachusetts Institute of Technology AI Accelerator 2020 FY20 15.5 DAF b MIT AI Accelerator 2020 b FY21 15.5 DAF b MIT AI Accelerator 2020 b FY22 15.5 VA National Artificial Intelligence Institute NAII 2020 FY20 10.9 VA National Artificial Intelligence Institute NAII 2020 FY21 17.9 VA National Artificial Intelligence Institute NAII 2020 FY22 24.7 TOTALS a FY20 26.4 TOTALS a FY21 33.4 TOTALS a FY22 40.2 Other Federally Funded AI Institutes Budget Table 4 Notes a. Totals might not sum exactly due to rounding. b. The Department of the Air Force DAF includes the U.S. Air Force and U.S. Space Force. Table 5. NITRD Agency Budgets for AWN R D, a, b FYs 2020 2022 FY2020 Budgets, Actual and Supplemental FY2021 Enacted Budgets and FY2022 Budget Requests in millions Agencies Fiscal Year DARPA DHS S T DOD Army DOD Navy DOD USAF NIST NSF NTIA TOTALS c FY20 Actual 34.4 8.2 8.7 9.0 4.3 6.8 130.7 6.2 208.3 FY20 Supplemental d 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 1.4 0.0 1.4 FY21 Enacted 36.4 0.0 7.5 12.3 0.0 7.1 129.8 9.2 202.3 FY21 Supplemental d 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 9.8 0.0 0.0 0.0 9.8 FY22 Request 21.9 0.0 8.4 15.8 0.0 7.1 168.9 10.0 232.1 AWN Budget Table 5 Notes a. Figures in Table 5 break out those portions of NITRD member agencies R D investments in the LSN PCA that are primarily dedicated to advanced wireless networks. AWN R D investments are typically coordinated through NITRD s WSRD IWG. The FY2021 Budget Supplement referred to AWN investments as advanced communications networks or ACN. b. The FY2021 Supplement was the first time NITRD collected AWN ACN R D numbers they are not comparable to NITRD budget reporting earlier than in the FY2021 Supplement. c. Totals might not sum exactly due to rounding. d. See footnote 17 on p. 13 regarding budget supplementals.  2. Agency NITRD and NAIIO Related R D Investments, FYs 2020 2022 NITRD and NAIIO Supplement to the President s FY2022 Budget 21 Budget Analysis Agency Budgets for Artificial Intelligence In support of Executive Order 13859, Maintaining American Leadership in Artificial Intelligence, 18 and the National Artificial Intelligence Research and Development Strategic Plan 2019 Update,19 NITRD worked with Federal agencies to establish a process to accurately account for AI R D investments, given that R D in AI intersects with multiple PCAs. Table 2, footnote d, gives examples of distinctions between AI and other PCAs. The FY2020 budget request set a baseline for reporting and tracking AI R D investments, consistent with the AI Executive Order. Because of the difference in the reporting process and AI scope newly defined in 2019, the AI investments reported in this FY2022 budget supplement are only comparable to other NITRD reported AI investments. Table 2 shows two types of AI R D investments 1 those with a primary emphasis on AI R D, which are reported under the AI PCA, and 2 those with primary emphases in areas other than AI R D, which are reported in other PCAs. The total FY2022 funding level shown for nondefense AI R D in Table 2 last cell in the rightmost column of Table 2 , 1,670.2 million, indicates the total of the nondefense Federal programs directly related to AI 1,108.5 million and the nondefense AI related efforts reported in the other PCAs 561.7 million . This total Federal FY2022 nondefense budget request in AI is an 8.8 percent increase over the FY2021 nondefense enacted investments of 1,534.4 billion and an 11.2 percent increase over the FY2021 nondefense budget request of 1.502.5 billion. The total AI R D funding level of 1,789.5 million Table 2, rightmost column, six lines from the bottom includes both nondefense and partial defense investments. In addition to what s counted in the NITRD PCAs for AI R D, NSF also funds 73.6 million in AI education. As required by the National Artificial Intelligence Initiative Act of 2020,20 Tables 4 and 5 report the actual, enacted, and requested budgets of agencies that have established and or invested in one or more of the National Artificial Intelligence Research Institutes for FYs 2020, 2021, and 2022. The legislation named the National Science Foundation as lead agency for the National AI Research Institutes. With several Federal partners including USDA and DHS, NSF began support of 18 National AI Research Institutes from 2020 2021, which together request a total of 68.1 million for FY2022.21 DAF and VA began operation of other AI Institutes in 2020 that are not directly affiliated with NSF but closely follow the legislative criteria for the National AI Research Institutes DAF and VA request 40.2 million for AI Institutes for FY2022. The total FY2022 request for AI Institutes is 108.3 million. Section 5 briefly describes the Institutes. Agency Budgets for Advanced Wireless Networks In support of the Presidential Memorandum on Developing a Sustainable Spectrum Strategy for America s Future, NITRD requested that agencies report investments in AWN referred to in FY2021 as Advanced Communications Networks or ACN as a portion of the investments reported in the LSN PCA.22 These AWN investments are reported in Table 5. The combined Federal FY2022 budget request in AWN R D of 232.1 million represents a 14.7 percent increase over the FY2021 enacted investments and a 22.8 percent increase over the FY2021 budget request. 18 19 20 Division E of the National Defense Authorization Act for Fiscal Year 2021, P.L. 116 283 H.R. 6395 , January 1, 2021 21 The projected 5 year budgets for FY2020 FY2026 for the NSF led AI Institutes totals 360 million. 22 See  2. Agency NITRD and NAIIO Related R D Investments, FYs 2020 2022 22 NITRD and NAIIO Supplement to the President s FY2022 Budget Changes in Overall Agency Budgets, FY2021 to FY2022 The following paragraphs note changes of investment greater than 10 million, by agency and PCA, between the FY2021 enacted budgets and the FY2022 budget requests. DARPA The decrease of 40.0 million is due to a decrease of 26.3 million in LSN following the completion of the Secure Handhelds on Assured Resilient networks at the tactical Edge SHARE and Dynamic Network Adaptation for Mission Optimization DyNAMO programs, with a small increase in CSP and small decreases in several other PCAs. DHS 23 The increase of 28.3 million is due to a 28.5 million increase in CSP at DHS S T primarily in the area of Cyber Data Analytics that includes funding Machine Learning infrastructure and algorithms and tools, zero trust, industrial control systems, and promoting additional cybersecurity research and development, with smaller increases and decreases in other programs and PCAs. DOD The decrease of 96.3 million is due to decreases of 37.9 million in LSN, 33.5 million in CSP, 11.3 million in EHCS, and smaller decreases in other PCAs these decreases are partially offset by an increase of 11.9 million in SPSQ and smaller increases in EdW and ENIT. DOE 24 The increase of 30.9 million is due to increases of 64.4 million in HCIA at DOE SC for efforts in microelectronics, AI, and data infrastructure, among many other efforts across SC, and 25.0 million in CSP at DOE OE for new funding in the Cyber R D program for FY2022. These are partially offset by decreases of 16.9 million in AI at DOE FE 16.2 million in CSP and 11.5 million in IRAS at DOE EERE with smaller increases and decreases in other programs and PCAs, including newly reported investments in ENIT. DOE NNSA The increase of 14.7 million is due to a 12.0 million increase in EHCS for a new activity on advanced memory technology research, per Congressional direction, and a smaller increase in AI. NASA The increase of 22.6 million is due to an increase of 18.3 million in HCIA for more computing capacity, enhanced R D, and synergy between HEC and data systems following NASA Science Mission Directorate s overall data and computing strategy, and smaller increases in EHCS and IRAS. NIH The increase of 108.8 million is due to increases of 37.5 million in CHuman for increased research in clinical studies using structured electronic healthcare and related data, 32.7 million in LSDMA to support the Back Pain Consortium BACPAC Research Program, 13.9 million in HCIA for new technologies to reconstruct whole brain images to characterize mammalian and related systems, and smaller increases in all other PCAs. NIST The increase of 15.0 million is entirely for an initiative to establish a new public private partnership to accelerate trustworthy AI while expanding AI research capacities across the NIST laboratories. NOAA The increase of 10 million is entirely due to an increase in the HCIA PCA for the Oceanic and Atmospheric Research OAR Supercomputing Climate Competitive Research Initiative Program, Project, and Activity PPA . NSF The increase of 494.1 million is due to increases across all PCAs to enhance fundamental R D and strengthen U.S. leadership in emerging technologies. 23 Includes CG, DHS CWMD, and DHS TSA. 24 Includes the following DOE subunits AITO, ARPA E, CESER, EERE, FE, NE, OE, and SC.   NITRD and NAIIO Supplement to the President s FY2022 Budget 23 3. Key Activities of the NITRD PCAs and IWGs Artificial Intelligence AI Research and Development R D PCA AI R D advances the ability of computer systems to perform tasks that have traditionally required human intelligence this includes R D in machine learning, computer vision, natural language processing understanding, intelligent decision support systems, and autonomous systems, as well as the novel application of these techniques to various domains, where not principally covered by other PCAs. Artificial Intelligence R D IWG Participating Agencies Army, DAF USAF USSF , DARPA, DHS, DOD, DOE, DOJ, DOT, FAA, FBI, FDA, GSA, IARPA, NARA, NASA, Navy, NIFA, NIH, NIJ, NIOSH, NIST, NMIO, NOAA, NSA, NSF, NTIA, ODNI, ONC, OSD, OSTP, State, USPTO, VA The AI R D IWG coordinates Federal AI R D and supports activities tasked by both the NSTC Select Committee on AI and the Subcommittee on Machine Learning and Artificial Intelligence. This vital work promotes U.S. leadership and global competitiveness in AI R D and its applications. Strategic Priorities and Associated Key Programs 1. Make long term investments in AI research Coordinate long term Federal investments in AI R D that could lead to transformative AI technologies and breakthroughs across all sectors of society. Key programs National AI Research Institutes25 DHS, DOT, NSF, USDA, industry partners Smart Health and Biomedical Research in the Era of Artificial Intelligence and Advanced Data Science NIH, NSF Science of Information, Computation, Learning and Fusion Computational Cognition Machine Intelligence and Efficient Robust Machine Learning programs AFOSR AI for Maneuver and Mobility ARL, CCDC Synthetic Data Generation, and Enhancing Performance Metrics DHS Learning with Less Labeling Lifelong Learning Machines Machine Common Sense and Synergistic Discovery and Design DARPA Randomized Algorithms for AI, Data centric Science at Scale and Scientific ML and AI DOE Bioconvergence and AI Analysis DOE, NIST, NSF Broad Agency Announcements Roadway Winter Maintenance and Traffic Operations and Computer Vision DOT Bridge2AI and Artificial Intelligence Machine Learning Consortium to Advance Health Equity and Researcher Diversity AIM AHEAD programs NIH Joint AI Center DOD Joint Design of Advanced Computing Solutions for Cancer DOE, NIH Advanced Air Mobility Lunar Gateway and Long Range Robotic Space Exploration NASA Agriculture and Food Research Initiative NIFA Autonomy and AI transmission and distribution investment roadmaps TRMC 25 See Table 3 in Section 3 and Section 5 for details about the National AI Research Institutes.  3. Key Activities of the NITRD PCAs and IWGs 24 NITRD and NAIIO Supplement to the President s FY2022 Budget Fundamental and Applied Research and Standards for AI Technologies and Novel Computational Hardware Paradigms for AI NIST Information Integration and Informatics Mathematical and Scientific Foundations of Deep Learning MoDL Stimulating Collaborative Advances Leveraging Expertise in the MoDL and Robust Intelligence NSF Mathematical Methods for Deep Learning Science of Autonomy Cognitive and Computational Neuroscience and Machine Learning, Reasoning, and Intelligence ONR National Artificial Intelligence Institute Build and coordinate the VA s AI R D capacity VA 2. Develop effective methods for human AI collaboration that attain optimal performance, efficiency, safety, and well being via advanced AI techniques for human augmentation, visualization, and AI human interfaces. Key programs Autonomous Swarms for Information aware Mission Operations with Verification and Interactive Learning for Mission Planning AFRL Distributed and Collaborative Intelligent Systems and Technology ARL, CCDC Few Shot Learning and AI Assistants for Text Search DHS International Nobel Turing Initiative AFOSR, DOE, NSF, OSD, and global partners National Robotics Initiative 3.0 Innovations in Integration of Robotics NRI 3.0 DOT, NASA, NIH, NIOSH, NSF, USDA Autonomous Voice Assistant NASA Real time or near real time decision making DHS, NSF, NIJ Stimulating Peripheral Activity to Relieve Conditions NIH AI Usability and User Trust NIST Human Centered Computing NSF Active Interpretation of Disparate Alternatives Artificial Social Intelligence for Successful Teams Automated Rapid Certification Of Software Causal Exploration of Complex Operational Environments Competency Aware Machine Learning Explainable Artificial Intelligence Knowledge directed AI Reasoning Over Schemas Science of AI and Learning for Open world Novelty and Symbiotic Design of Cyber Physical Systems DARPA Manned Unmanned Teaming and Assured DevOps of Autonomous Systems ADAS TRMC 3. Understand and address the ethical, legal, and societal implications of AI Develop design methods for trustworthy AI that align with ethical legal societal goals and expectations. Key programs Fairness in AI NSF, Amazon Perceptions of AI ML DHS Driver Facial Privacy DOT, NSF Ethical AI NASA Agriculture and Food Research Initiative AFRI NIFA AIM AHEAD NIH AI Risk Management Framework NIST Explainable AI and Bias in AI Systems programs NIST, NSF Future of Work at the Human Technology Frontier FW HTF NSF  3. Key Activities of the NITRD PCAs and IWGs NITRD and NAIIO Supplement to the President s FY2022 Budget 25 4. Ensure the safety and security of AI systems so that they operate in a controlled, well defined, and well understood manner. Key programs Life Cycle Autonomy Assurance TRMC Combat Vehicle Robotics Autonomy Safety Engineering Army, CCDC Secure AI NIST AI Enterprise Infrastructure and Cybersecurity Subcommittee JAIC Trojans in Artificial Intelligence IARPA, NIST Cybersecurity and Software Verification and Validation NASA Secure and Trustworthy Cyberspace NSF Assured Autonomy and Guaranteeing AI Robustness against Deception DARPA 5. Develop shared public datasets and environments for AI training and testing to enable discovery, access, and use. Key programs Streamlined ML Stratagem and Fuel AI AFRL Cloud Research Environments Census Joint Analytic Computing Environment DHS FAIR findable, accessible, interoperable, and reusable Data and Models for AI and ML DOE National Institute on Aging Genetics of Alzheimer s Disease Medical Imaging Data Resource Center Genotype Tissue Expression and Trans Omics for Precision Medicine NIH Trusted Spectrum Sharing and Testing DOD, NASA, NTIA, NIST, NSF Joint Automated Repository Spectrum Sharing Models and Measurement Tools and Smart Manufacturing NIST Training Data for Machine Learning to Enhance Patient Centered Outcomes Research Data Infrastructure and Synthetic Health Data Generation to Accelerate Patient Centered Outcomes Research ONC Advanced Information Systems Technology and Advancing Collaborative Connections for Earth System Science NASA Convergence Accelerator NSF Collecting Autonomy and AI Data at the Tactical Edge Modeling and Simulation as a Service and ADAS TRMC VA Data Commons VA 6. Measure and evaluate AI technologies through standards and benchmarks to address safety, reliability, accuracy, usability, interoperability, robustness, and security. Key programs Common Data Elements Advance use of healthcare data standards in research e.g., U.S. Core Data for Interoperability and Fast Healthcare Interoperability Resource NIH Applied Artificial Intelligence Machine Learning Deep Learning AI ML DL DHS AI standards development NIST, all AI IWG agencies AI validation and evaluation NIST  3. Key Activities of the NITRD PCAs and IWGs 26 NITRD and NAIIO Supplement to the President s FY2022 Budget 7. Better understand the national AI R D workforce needs Grow the AI R D workforce to ensure America leads the AI innovation of the future. See the EdW PCA. 8. Expand PPPs to accelerate advances in AI and strengthen the Nation s R D ecosystem. See also Key Coordination Activities below and Section 5 on the National AI Research Institutes, designed as multidisciplinary, multisector AI R D, education, and workforce development endeavors. Key programs Fairness in AI NSF, Amazon National AI Research Institutes DHS, DOT, NSF, USDA, industry partners DAF MIT AI Accelerator DAF, Massachusetts Institute of Technology Innovare Advancement Center AFRL, private partners Autonomy Research Collaboration Network ARL, DOD Academic Industry Engagement and Acquisition Subcommittee JAIC Digital Assistants for Science and Engineering NASA, SBIR STTR partners Center for Real Time Analytics DHS, NSF Science and Technology Research Infrastructure for Discovery, Experimentation, and Sustainability STRIDES initiative NIH National Cybersecurity Center of Excellence NIST, industry partners AI Tech Sprint and VA National AI Institute VA Aviation Safety Information Analysis and Sharing Analyze flight recorded data and safety reports for safety incidents FAA, NASA, NTSB, and industry partners Collaboration Research Alliance Effect rapid transition of innovative S T for Army modernization ARL, academia, industry Multidisciplinary University Research Initiative OSD, tri service, academia Key Coordination Activities Standards for AI Work with Federal partners to define and establish shared AI standards. All agencies NIST serves as U.S. Government AI standards coordinator. Advanced Information Systems Technology Develop and apply AI ML to Earth Science. NASA Computer Vision Assess behavior of drivers and pedestrians to improve traffic safety. FTA, FMCSA, NHTSA, NSF, NIST Science Technology Partnership Forum Develop trusted autonomy technologies for use in space. NASA, NRO, U.S. Space Force Principal Investigator PI meetings Review research, identify new applications, and discuss S T gaps and barriers. DARPA, DOD, DOE, DHS, DOT, NASA, NIFA, NIH, NIJ, NIOSH, NIST, NSA, NSF Joint Artificial Intelligence Center Coordinate military service and defense agency AI adoption efforts. DOD, OSD Video and Image Analytics VIA Team of the AI IWG Document the Open Media Processing Framework. DHS, FBI, FHWA, NIJ, NIST, NSF Joint All Domain Command and Control Experiment with AI to connect sensors across military services into a single network. Army, Navy, USAF Artificial Intelligence Technology Office Coordinate AI R D across the DOE Enterprise. DOE Smart and Connected Communities Support AI R D to solve problems facing U.S. communities. NSF and local government agencies  3. Key Activities of the NITRD PCAs and IWGs NITRD and NAIIO Supplement to the President s FY2022 Budget 27 Computing Enabled Human Interaction, Communication, and Augmentation CHuman PCA CHuman R D advances information technologies that enhance people s ability to interact with IT systems, other people, and the physical world this includes R D in social computing, human human and human machine interaction and collaboration, and human and social impacts of IT.26 Reporting Agencies AHRQ, CDC, CMS, DOD, Navy, NASA, NIH, NIJ, NIOSH, NIST, NOAA, NSF, ONC, USAF, USDA Strategic Priorities and Associated Key Programs 1. Develop cohesive sociotechnical systems that support collaboration and innovation, including systems that help people manage, verify, and disseminate information online systems that help teams, crowds, and organizations coordinate productively and systems that integrate diverse human teams having knowledge of both constructive and malicious human behaviors with ubiquitous computing, networking, data analytic, and knowledge representation systems. Key programs Clinical decision support CDS initiative Develop grants and contracts to assist healthcare providers move patient centered outcomes research into practice AHRQ, CMS, CDC, VA Care transition research grants Fund research to produce evidence and evidence based tools to improve care transitions AHRQ Human Centered Computing Fund research in human computer interaction HCI , taken broadly, integrating knowledge across disciplines such as the social and behavioral sciences with computer and information sciences in order to design new computing systems to amplify diverse humans physical, cognitive, and social capabilities to accomplish individual and collective goals to assess benefits, effects, and risks of computing systems and to understand how human, technical, and contextual aspects of systems interact to shape those effects NSF Explainable AI and Bias in AI Systems programs Conduct foundational research to build trust in AI systems by improving explainability, avoiding bias, and preventing discrimination NIST Fairness in AI Fund computational research focused on fairness in AI, with the goal of contributing to the acceptance and deployment of trustworthy AI systems NSF, Amazon Health IT safety research grants Fund research on safe health IT practices specifically related to design, implementation, usability, and safe use of health IT by all users, including patients AHRQ NRI 3.0 Build on the NRI program to support fundamental research that will accelerate the development and use of integrated robot systems, including systems that work seamlessly beside or cooperatively with people to assist them in every aspect of life DOT, NASA, NIH, NIOSH, NSF, USDA Safe Use of Robotics in the Workplace Evaluate potential benefits and risks of robots in the workplace and develop interventions and guidance for safe, effective human robot interactions NIOSH 2. Improve interfaces between humans and intelligent systems, including robots, intelligent agents, autonomous vehicles, and machine learning systems, to accomplish complex missions. 26 There is no IWG for this PCA the NITRD Subcommittee and other IWGs coordinate CHuman activities.  3. Key Activities of the NITRD PCAs and IWGs 28 NITRD and NAIIO Supplement to the President s FY2022 Budget Key programs Usability grants Focus on designing and implementing intuitive digital healthcare systems that readily support clinical workflow AHRQ National Artificial Intelligence Research Institute on Human AI Interaction and Collaboration Support research on all the modalities through which people can collaborate with intelligent machines toward common goals NSF, industry partners Human Systems Integration Architecture for Increasingly Earth Independent Mission Operations Enable crews to address mission anomalies using intelligent systems on spacecraft, and human in the loop planning and coordination for unmanned aerial systems NASA Intelligent Multi UxV Planner w Adaptive Collaborative Control Technologies Allow a human operator and teams of autonomous machines to work together to accomplish missions USAF Operations at Scale Against Adversaries Use human machine teaming with open systems architecture to facilitate the use of any communications standard e.g., NATO standardization agreement STANAG 4586 to connect air, land, maritime vehicles, and potentially, cyber and space command and control USAF Innovative Platform for Objective Monitoring of Instrumental Activities of Daily Living IADL Design and commercialize a robust platform for objective, continuous remote monitoring of IADLs in older adults at risk for dementia or Alzheimer s disease NIH Machine Learning for HIV Prevention Improve automation of secure data collection and prediction of individuals at high risk for infection as part of HIV prevention strategies NIH Fecobionics Device Develop a simulation tool to map colonic and anorectal neuromuscular function in a single examination as a replacement for multiple tests for anorectal function NIH Person Centered Mobile Apps for Alzheimer s Disease and Alzheimer s Disease Related Dementia Family Caregivers Improve patient self care management, and reduce physiological, social, and psychological burdens for family caregivers through remote interactions with clinicians and support personnel NIH 3. Promote education and workforce development in understanding human IT interactions. In conjunction with investments in the EdW PCA, develop new instructional materials and teacher professional development models based on evolving educational and technological practices. See the EdW PCA. Key Coordination Activities Patient Reported Outcomes PRO Learning Collaborative Meet annually with grantees to share innovative health IT strategies on how to collect and use PRO data in ambulatory care settings. AHRQ National Webinars Broadcast recurring public webinars on health IT related topics for grantees, healthcare providers, and researchers. AHRQ Clinical Decision Support CDS Connect Work Group Gather stakeholder input regarding repositories and standards based tools through public, patient centered monthly meetings that feature presentations from CDS Connect users. AHRQ, CDC, CMS, NIH, VA  3. Key Activities of the NITRD PCAs and IWGs NITRD and NAIIO Supplement to the President s FY2022 Budget 29 Computing Enabled Networked Physical Systems CNPS PCA CNPS R D advances information technology enabled systems that integrate the cyber information, physical, and human worlds this includes R D of cyber physical systems, Internet of Things, and related complex, high reliability, real time, networked, and hybrid computing and engineered systems. Computing Enabled Networked Physical Systems IWG Participating Agencies Army, BLS, DOE OE, DOT ITS JPO, FDA, FHWA, ITA, NASA, Navy, NIFA, NIH, NIST, NRC, NSA, NSF, NTIA, ONR, OSD, OSTP, USACE, USAF The CNPS IWG coordinates Federal R D to advance and assure integrated IT enabled cyber, physical, and human systems. This spans complex, high reliability, safety security critical, real time computing and engineered systems with varying degrees of autonomy and human system interaction in such uses as automated vehicles, smart grids, manufacturing, intelligent defense systems, and smart cities. Strategic Priorities and Associated Key Programs 1. Develop core science and engineering for CNPS technologies including unified foundations, models and analysis tools, system capabilities, interoperability standards, assurance approaches, and architectures. Key programs Develop the core research needed to engineer complex cyber physical systems CPS , some of which may also require dependable, high confidence, or provable behaviors DHS, FHWA, NIFA, NIH, NSF Support research projects that take a systems oriented approach to development of novel computing and networking technologies, or to the enhancement of existing systems in any of several dimensions, or that explore new ways to make use of existing technologies NSF, NTIA Develop state of the art measurement solutions, reliable testing and certification methods, and robust implementation practices for scalable, interoperable, safe, secure, reconfigurable, reproducible, and resilient cyber physical systems and Internet of Things IoT solutions and testbeds NIST, NSF Secure design methodologies for trusted execution of high assurance systems ONR Support spectrum monitoring and surveying over the entire lifecycle of new radio technologies NTIA 2. Support creation of new and emerging ideas for CNPS to enable safety and security spanning system design, development, and verification, including applications of digital twins, formal methods, and other concepts emerging from the CNPS IWG as well as related NITRD IWGs. Key programs Develop new concepts for transforming existing systems to integrate real time learning and control for new environments and operating modes, and create supporting verification approaches that reconcile concepts of model based verification with formal methods DHS, FHWA, NASA, NIFA, NIH, NSF Support and enable automated vehicles to interact and communicate with infrastructure and other vehicles via cooperative driving automation DHS, DOD, DOT, FHWA, FMCSA, FTA, ITS JPO, MARAD, NASA, NHTSA, NSF  3. Key Activities of the NITRD PCAs and IWGs 30 NITRD and NAIIO Supplement to the President s FY2022 Budget Leverage the development of lightweight simulation language and metrics to measure the quality of an adversarial influence strategy, and design models to simulate attacker and defender uses of ML ARL, NSA, NSF, OUSD R E Develop formal methods to automatically interrogate and extract interpretable formal models from deep neural networks, with a focus on providing an interrogation capability and framework that will answer queries from a domain expert NSA Develop formalized multimodal data integration modeling and robust predictive analytic platforms to propel biomedical research into a new paradigm and offer in silico patient avatars from the totality of medical evidence available for precision medicine NIH Develop rigorous and reproducible methodologies for designing and implementing correct by construction systems and applications with provable guarantees NASA, NSF 3. Support advances in smart cities and communities by investing in multidisciplinary, multisector collaborations that leverage CNPS applications for solutions in areas such as public health and well being, transportation and mobility, energy, smart infrastructure, agricultural and rural connectivity, emergency management, resilience, public safety, and water management. Key programs Accelerate the creation of the scientific and engineering foundations that will enable smart and connected communities to bring about new levels of economic opportunity and growth, safety and security, health and wellness, and overall quality of life FHWA, NIFA, NSF Promote the formation, growth, and advancement of project teams of community leaders and private sector innovators for replicable smart city solutions and teams of teams for smart city technology blueprints for transportation, public safety, data, and other application areas ITA, NASA, NIST, NSF, NTIA Convene leaders of the Global City Teams Challenge leadership teams, industry, cities, state and regional associations, industry leaders, R D researchers and universities, States, and Federal agencies to encourage innovation and collaboration to solve complex smart cities issues DHS S T, NIST, NSF, NTIA Establish a research and action competition in the Smart and Connected Communities domain designed to build a more cohesive research to innovation pipeline DHS S T, DOE, NSF Provide increased food and nutritional security and more viable and thriving rural communities through development of high output and efficient controlled environment urban agriculture systems NIFA, NSF Coordinate the development of urban air mobility with the community through ecosphere working groups, including leveraging and supporting Smart Cities and Communities SCC efforts and blueprints FAA, ITA, NASA, NIST, industry partners 4. Leverage CNPS R D investment to facilitate multisector technology transfer to public and private systems. Key programs Support integration of cooperative driving automation R D with new transportation system management and operations strategies DHS, DOD, FHWA, FMCSA, FRA, FTA, ITS JPO, MARAD, NHTSA, NSF Enable consensus based automated driving systems safety measurement methods for use by industry NHTSA, NIST Support high impact transition to practice activities in CPS and SCC programs FHWA, NSF  3. Key Activities of the NITRD PCAs and IWGs NITRD and NAIIO Supplement to the President s FY2022 Budget 31 Develop and integrate computer and information science and engineering S E approaches to support the advancement of health and medicine to better support the wide ranging healthcare needs of the American people NIH, NSF Stimulate CNPS related innovations in the private sector and strengthen the role of Federal R D in support of small businesses NIFA 5. Promote inclusive education, training, and career development through curricula that integrates CNPS and by providing scientists and researchers venues for communication and collaboration. See the EdW PCA. Key Coordination Activities CPS Principal Investigator meetings Meet annually to assemble CPS researchers and multiple agency partners to review CPS research results. DOD, DOE, DHS, DOT, NASA, NIFA, NIH, NIST, NSA, NSF All of Us Establish a one million volunteer participant group reflecting the Nation s genealogical and health diversity to contribute health data to leverage technology advances in genomics, computing, and data analytics, and to capitalize on mobile health technology. NIH, public and private partners Global Cities Team Challenge Action Clusters Engage stakeholders to develop best practices and projects for foundational elements of smart cities ecosystems including such domains as agricultural and rural smart systems, smart buildings, smart regions, and smart states. DHS, NASA, NIFA, NIST, NSF, NTIA  3. Key Activities of the NITRD PCAs and IWGs 32 NITRD and NAIIO Supplement to the President s FY2022 Budget Cyber Security and Privacy CSP PCA CSP R D advances protection of information, information systems, and people from cyber threats and prevention of adverse privacy effects arising from information processing this includes R D to deter, detect, prevent, counter, respond to, recover from, and adapt to threats to the availability, integrity, and confidentiality of information and information systems, along with R D to address privacy goals of individuals and society related to direct and indirect effects of information processing.27 Cyber Security and Information Assurance CSIA IWG Participating Agencies Army, DARPA, DHS, DOE CESER, DOT, IARPA, Navy, NIH, NIJ, NIST, NRC, NSA, NSF, OSD, Treasury, USAF The CSIA IWG coordinates Federal R D to protect information and information systems from cyber threats. This R D supports the security and safety of U.S. information systems that underpin a vast array of capabilities and technologies in many sectors, including power generation, transportation, finance, healthcare, manufacturing, and national security. Strategic Priorities and Associated Key Programs 28 Federal cybersecurity R D is a substantial portfolio. This section provides thematical highlights of the main lines of research pursued by those programs, mapped against the CSIA strategic priorities. The programs are listed in the accompanying FY2022 Federal Cybersecurity R D Strategic Plan Implementation Roadmap.29 Defensive Areas 1. Deter Develop methods to assess adversary levels of effort, results, and risks provide for effective and timely attribution of malicious cyber activities to their sources design robust investigative tools and support information sharing for attribution. Key programs Cyber deception ARL, DOE CESER, ONR Cyber attribution AFRL, DARPA Active social engineering defense and attribution DARPA, NSF Autonomous and agile cyber defense ARL, C5ISR, NSF, ONR, OSD 2. Protect Develop technologies to limit system vulnerabilities through design, construction, and verification, and to enforce security though techniques such as authentication, access control, and cryptography. Key programs Automated and autonomous cyber defense and operations ARL, C5ISR, DOE CESER, NSA, NSF, ONR, OSD Assured systems AFRL, DARPA, NIST, NSA, NSF, ONR Resilient cyber, cyber physical, and IoT systems AFRL, ARL, C5ISR, DARPA, DHS, DOE CESER, HPCMP, NIH, NIST, NSA, NSF, ONR Application, network, mobile, and hardware security AFRL, ARL, C5ISR, DARPA, DHS, DOE CESER, NIST, NSA, NSF, ONR, OSD 27 Both the CSIA and Privacy R D IWGs report budgets under the CSP PCA. 28 See Federal cybersecurity R D priorities in 29  3. Key Activities of the NITRD PCAs and IWGs NITRD and NAIIO Supplement to the President s FY2022 Budget 33 Configuration and vulnerability management DARPA, NIST, NSA, NSF 3. Detect Develop technologies to ensure that system owners and users have situational awareness and understanding of ongoing activities and can reliably detect malicious cyber activities. Key programs Cyber situational awareness AFRL, ARL, C5ISR, DARPA, DOE CESER, HPCMP, NSA, OSD Cyber maneuver and adaptation ARL Malware detection and mitigation DHS, DOE CESER, NIST, NSF, ONR Machine learning for security DARPA, DOE CESER, NIST, NSA, NSF, OSD 4. Respond Develop technologies to provide real time assessment of system anomalies, provide adaptive response to disruptions, sustain critical functions, and enable automated recovery. Key programs Autonomous, agile, and adaptive cyber response technologies AFRL, ARL, C5ISR, DARPA, DOE CESER, NSA, NSF, ONR, OSD Countering cyber attacks DARPA, NSF, OSD Priority Areas 5. Artificial Intelligence Develop solutions that enable automated cyber defense, minimize susceptibility of AI systems to attacks, and ensure that AI systems are explainable. Key programs AI for cybersecurity AFRL, ARL, C5ISR, DARPA, DOE CESER, HPCMP, NIST, NSA, NSF, ONR, OSD Cybersecurity of AI ARL, C5ISR, NIST, NSA, NSF, OSD Standards for AI NIH, NIST 6. Quantum Information Science Develop technologies for securing quantum software and hardware and for developing countermeasures against quantum based attacks. Key programs Quantum programming and protocols AFRL, DOE CESER, NSF Quantum resistant cryptography NIST, NSF 7. Trustworthy Distributed Digital Infrastructure Develop technologies to provide secure and resilient communication and computing infrastructures that incorporate advanced wireless, cloud computing, IoT, and CPS resources. Key programs Wireless and network security AFRL, ARL, C5ISR, DARPA, DHS, DOE CESER, NIST, NSF, NSA, OSD Protection of cyber physical and IoT systems AFRL, DHS, DOE CESER, NSA, NSF, ONR 8. Privacy Develop solutions to enable privacy protecting data processing and analytics and to provide for recovery from privacy violations. Key programs See also the Privacy R D IWG Cryptography for privacy DOE CESER, NSA, NSF Privacy Framework NIST  3. Key Activities of the NITRD PCAs and IWGs 34 NITRD and NAIIO Supplement to the President s FY2022 Budget 9. Secure Hardware and Software Develop technologies to assure that the design and operation of IT hardware and software can be verifiably trusted and cannot be maliciously compromised. Key programs Software assurance AFRL, DARPA, DHS, DOE CESER, NIST, NSA, NSF, ONR, OSD Formal verification of software and hardware AFRL, DARPA, NSF, ONR Secure microprocessors and IoT AFRL, NSA, NSF 10. Education and Workforce Development Develop and accelerate adoption of effective educational programs to prepare the Nation, at all education levels and in all sectors of society, for possible careers in cybersecurity and for safe and secure use of cyberspace. The following agencies have programs in these areas AFRL, DOE CESER, NIST, NSA, NSF, ONR, OSD Key Coordination Activities Prepare the Federal Cybersecurity R D Strategic Plan Implementation Roadmap Provide annually as directed by the Cybersecurity Enhancement Act of 2014. All CSIA IWG agencies Cryptographic standards development. NIST, NSA Standards development and standards setting Engage with national and international bodies e.g., 3GPP, IETF, ISO, ANSI, IEEE in developing and setting cybersecurity standards. NIST, NSA, OSD Collaborative research with academia and industry o Cyber Research Alliance. ARL, C5ISR o Cyber Resilient Energy Delivery Consortium. DOE CESER o Cyber physical systems security. DARPA, DOT, NIST, NSF o National Cybersecurity Center of Excellence. NIST o Cyber cyber physical security public working groups. NIST Cyber technology demonstrations. DARPA, NIST, NSA, OSD Cybersecurity and privacy research workshops. NSF DOD Cyber Community of Interest Provide oversight and coordination among DOD cyber S T programs. AFRL, ARL, C5ISR, DARPA, NSA, ONR, OSD National Centers of Academic Excellence in Cybersecurity. CISA, USCYBERCOM, DOD, NIST, NSF, NSA National Initiative for Cybersecurity Education NICE and annual NICE Conference Expo. Lead a robust multisector ecosystem for education and training, promotion of careers, and sustained development of a diverse skilled workforce in cybersecurity. NIST, Community and Interagency Coordinating Councils CyberCorps Scholarship for Service, Advanced Technological Education programs. NSF Advanced Course in Engineering cybersecurity. AFRL, NSA International collaborations o Science programs with Israel, Brazil, and Ireland. NSF o The Technical Cooperation Program Command, Control, Communications, Cyber, Information Systems Group with Australia, Canada, New Zealand, and the United Kingdom. AFRL, ARL, C5ISR, NSA, ONR, OSD o Cyber Research, Prototyping, and Transition of Capability Steering Group. AFRL, ARL, NSA, OSD, Defence Science and Technology Laboratory UK  3. Key Activities of the NITRD PCAs and IWGs NITRD and NAIIO Supplement to the President s FY2022 Budget 35 Privacy Research and Development IWG Participating Agencies Army, Census, DHS, FTC, NARA, Navy, NIH, NIST, NSA, NSF, NTIA, OSD, USAF The Privacy R D IWG coordinates Federal R D aimed at preventing adverse privacy effects arising from information processing, including R D of privacy protecting information systems and standards. This R D supports advances in large scale data analytics that can improve healthcare, eliminate barriers to education and employment, and increase efficiencies in the transportation and financial sectors while minimizing risks to individual privacy and possible harms such as discrimination, loss of autonomy, and economic losses. Strategic Priorities and Associated Key Programs 1. Understand privacy desires and impacts. Key programs Develop models and conduct studies to understand peoples privacy needs in different contexts Census, NIH, NIST, NSA, NSF 2. Develop system design methods that incorporate privacy requirements and controls. Key programs Apply formal privacy safeguards to the 2020 Census and American Community Survey Census Develop practical approaches for implementing privacy protections in data analytics systems Census, NIH, NIST, NSA, NSF Provide methods for secure, privacy preserving access to precision medicine data NIH, NSF Develop privacy framework and standards based tools and privacy engineering practices NIST 3. Develop techniques to assure that information use is consistent with privacy rules. Key programs Build encryption for privacy protections NIH, NSA, NSF Determine privacy engineering and technical standards for privacy NIST, NSA 4. Develop solutions to enable user driven controls and actions over data collection, use, and deletion. Key programs Protect privacy in networking, mobile computing, and the IoT NSA, NSF Advance data sharing under patient consent NIH, NSF 5. Develop solutions for minimizing privacy risks while maximizing utility of data analytics. Key programs Adopt differential privacy for the 2020 Census Census Develop techniques to assure privacy protections in analytical and ML systems NIH, NIST, NSA, NSF Develop secure and private collaboration environments Census, NIH, NSF 6. Develop solutions for recovery from privacy violations. Key programs Develop techniques to mitigate privacy violations and support privacy recovery NIST, NSF  3. Key Activities of the NITRD PCAs and IWGs 36 NITRD and NAIIO Supplement to the President s FY2022 Budget Key Coordination Activities NIST Privacy Engineering Collaboration Space Actively support this online forum for sharing use cases and tools to advance privacy engineering. All Privacy R D IWG agencies Workshops Continue the annual workshops on privacy research topics such as privacy controls, privacy framework, algorithmic transparency, and consumer privacy protections. FTC, NIST, NSF Federal Privacy Council Participate actively in this interagency forum organized to improve the privacy practices of Federal agencies. FTC, NIST, NSF Technical privacy guidelines Develop and coordinate recommendations, guidelines, and standards for privacy preserving technologies and privacy risk assessment methodologies. Census, NIST International collaborations o Engage in international privacy standards development. NIST o Co fund privacy research activities with the Netherlands, Ireland, and Israel. NSF  3. Key Activities of the NITRD PCAs and IWGs NITRD and NAIIO Supplement to the President s FY2022 Budget 37 Education and Workforce EdW PCA EdW R D advances the use of information technology to improve education and training this includes IT to enhance learning, teaching, assessment, and standards, as well as preparation of next generation cyber capable citizens and professionals. Investment planning is also guided by the 2018 Federal STEM Education five year plan, Charting a Course for Success America s Strategy for STEM Education.30,31 Reporting Agencies Census, DAF USAF USSF , DHS, DOC, DOD, DOE NNSA, DOE SC, DOJ, DOT, FCC, FTC, HHS, NASA, Navy, NIFA, NIH, NIST, NSA, NSF, ODNI, ONC, SSA, USGS, VA Strategic Priorities and Associated Key Programs 1. Ensure a consistent flow of skilled workers capable of using the tools and methods of the economy of the future by creating opportunities to teach and learn computational literacy and computational thinking at all educational levels. Opportunities must span multiple STEM and IT domains actively support diversity and inclusion and include internships, fellowships, and early career research opportunities. Key programs AFRL Scholars Program Offer stipend paid internships for K 12 educators, high school students, and undergraduate, and graduate level students pursuing STEM degrees AFRL Census Academy Set up and develop a virtual hub for teaching learning data skills for all skill levels Census Science, Mathematics, And Research for Transformation Scholarship for Service Program Combine educational and workforce development opportunities for bachelors, masters, and PhD students to gain technical skills in critical STEM fields and support the DOD mission DOD Student access to HPC resources various programs Provide access to HPC resources to undergraduate, graduate, doctoral, and post doctoral students to pursue research and applications and solve complex science, medical, and engineering problems DOE NNSA, DOE SC, HPCMP, NIH, NIST, NSF Research, training, and fellowship programs in biomedical and health informatics, quantitative and computational biology, and allergies and infectious disease data science NIH Brain based Neurorobots Introduce high school students to neuroscience, neurocomputation, and AI concepts using robots controlled by computer simulations of biological brains NIH Coding it Forward Civic Digital Fellowship Provide 10 weeks of hands on experience with biomedical data related challenges NIH Graduate Fellowship Program Support doctoral students in STEM research to advance NIJ s mission NIJ NIST International and Academic Affairs Office Offer STEM related educational experiences ranging from K 12 to postdoctoral research associateships related to the NIST mission NIST K 12 bootstrapping activities Initiate STEM activities with high schools that are feeders for HBCUs NSA Computer Science for All Research and Researcher Practitioner Partnerships RPPs Fund research and RPPs to bring computer science and computational thinking to all schools at the pre K 12 levels NSF 30 31 There is no IWG for this PCA the NITRD Subcommittee and other IWGs coordinate EdW activities directly.  3. Key Activities of the NITRD PCAs and IWGs 38 NITRD and NAIIO Supplement to the President s FY2022 Budget Computer Science Principles Cyber Develop cybersecurity instructional materials aligned with the College Board s Advanced Placement Computer Science Principles exam and course framework NSF Computing in Undergraduate Education Fund teams of institutions of higher education in reenvisioning the role of computing in interdisciplinary collaboration within their institutions NSF Research Experience for Undergraduates and CyberCorps Scholarship for Service Fund research experiences for undergraduates for CyberCorps, providing tuition for cybersecurity studies in exchange for a Federal employment condition , including by groups long underrepresented in STEM and IT fields DOD, NIH, NSF JROTC Cyber Academy Pilot a 10 week program modeled on the Air Force JROTC Flight Academy NSF Computer and Information Science and Engineering Graduate Fellowships Increase the number of diverse, domestic graduate students pursuing research and innovation careers in computer science, computer engineering, and information science NSF Cyberinfrastructure for Sustained Scientific Innovation Supply and sustain the necessary resources such as software libraries, tools, and platforms to support teaching and research NSF NSF Research Traineeship Explore ways for graduate students in research based master s and doctoral degree programs to develop the skills, knowledge, and competencies needed to pursue a range of STEM careers, particularly in high priority areas NSF Computational Center for Earth Sciences Allow students to work on USGS real world science projects via internships and class projects, and co develop STEM scientific computing curricula with academia USGS 2. Prepare all Americans, through computational thinking and literacy lifelong learning programs in the workplace and community, to successfully participate in the economy and society of the future. Key programs Education and community development programs Include development of a technology and data savvy workforce ready for jobs within the food and agricultural sciences AFRI, NIFA Machine Learning Bootcamp Develop and execute intensive ML bootcamps for civilian and military scientists and engineers and acquisition leaders to build the needed workforce AFRI, AFRL Learning Health System Mentored Career Development Train clinician and research scientists to conduct patient centered research to improve quality of care and patient outcomes AHRQ, Patient Centered Outcomes Research Institute Exascale Computing Project training program Ensure that the scientific community can regularly receive training to exploit new technologies and best practices DOE Office of Science Early Career Research Program Provide support to researchers during the early, often most formative, career years DOE Intelligent Transportation Systems ITS Professional Capacity Building Program Provide free training to practitioners, students, and instructors to help build skills in ITS technologies DOT Leverage professional and academic development programs to increase the knowledge and skills of the workforce, including encouraging and rewarding publishing in academic journals HPCMP NASA Digital Transformation team Identify means either existing or that need development to upskill the NASA workforce e.g., management, mission area experts, scientists, researchers in AI NASA  3. Key Activities of the NITRD PCAs and IWGs NITRD and NAIIO Supplement to the President s FY2022 Budget 39 Augmented Reality System for clinical caregivers and National Neuroscience Curriculum Initiative Synapse for medical professionals Provide tools to upskill existing healthcare workers NIH NICE Workforce Framework for Cybersecurity Provide a common taxonomy for use by learners, educators, and employers to address life long learning in cybersecurity work roles or career pathways NIST Future of Work at the Human Technology Frontier Fund convergent research to understand and develop the human technology partnership, including understanding the risks and benefits of new technologies on workers and work, and fostering lifelong and pervasive learning NIOSH, NSF Data Science Corps Provide practical experiences, teach new skills, and offer learning opportunities in different settings in data science NSF Faculty Early Career Development Program and Research Initiation Initiative programs Support research independence among early career academicians in computer and information S E NSF Training based Workforce Development for Advanced Cyberinfrastructure Prepare, nurture, and grow the Nation s scientific research workforce for creating, utilizing, and supporting advanced cyber infrastructure to enable and potentially transform fundamental science and engineering research NSF 3. Promote coordination and collaboration among Federal agencies and business, educational, and nonprofit communities to develop a persistent and robust U.S. IT education ecosystem including educational programs, tools, and technologies. Key programs Science and Technology Policy Fellowships Empower partnerships with industry and government DHS Enhance training of clinician and research scientists to conduct health IT related research, develop new evidence, and improve the quality and safety of care AHRQ, NIH, NSF Research on Emerging Technologies for Teaching and Learning Fund exploratory and synergistic research in emerging technologies e.g., AI, robotics, and immersive or augmenting technologies for teaching and learning in the future NSF Broadening Participation in Computing Alliances Extend the national and regional collaborations of academic institutions, educators, professional societies, community organizations, and industrial partners to increase the number and diversity of college graduates in computationally intensive disciplines NSF DAF MIT AI Accelerator Research fundamental advances in AI to improve Air Force operations and address societal needs DAF, Massachusetts Institute of Technology U.S. Naval Academy Research Collaborate with other universities to provide Academy students with research experience DOD, academic partners Academic Industry Engagement and Acquisition Subcommittee Maximize outreach to traditional and nontraditional partners to develop and incorporate agile methods for training and tools JAIC Innovare Advancement Center Build alliances aiming to innovate in critical areas AFRL, academia, industry Open Campus Build enduring research partnerships to solve key Army challenges ARL, academia, industry Predictive Science Academic Alliance Engage the academic community in advancing science based modeling and simulation DOE NNSA  3. Key Activities of the NITRD PCAs and IWGs 40 NITRD and NAIIO Supplement to the President s FY2022 Budget National AI Research Institutes 32 Advance AI innovation across issues of national importance including education and human resource development DHS, DOT FHWA ITS JPO, NSF, USDA, industry partners AI Tech Sprints and National Artificial Intelligence Institute Incentivize a whole of nation AI able ecosystem to address veterans health challenges VA, academic and industry partners HPC performance based, incentive based contracting Support the hiring of HPC subject matter experts from various sources such as small businesses and universities HPCMP Supporting Teachers in Responsive Instruction for Developing Expertise in Science STRIDES project Set up novel partnerships to broaden teachers access to training on the latest data science services and tools NSF Data and Technology Advancement National Service Scholar Program Recruit data and computer scientists from industry to work on grand challenge biomedical problems NIH National Cybersecurity Center of Excellence Partner with industry, government agencies, and academic institutions to enable the creation of practical guidance and cybersecurity solutions NIST NICE Interagency and Community Coordinating Councils Assemble representatives of Federal agencies, State governments, academic K 12 and higher education , and industry entities to consult, communicate, and coordinate on projects aimed at cybersecurity education, training, and workforce development NIST Joint Center for Quantum Information and Computer Science Assemble computer scientists, quantum information scientists, and communication scientists to conduct world class research in QIS NIST, NSA OnRamp II Continue work to foster educational partnerships between NSA and academic institutions to promote a strong and diverse STEM pipeline NSA GenCyber Provide summer cybersecurity camp experiences for K 12 students and teachers NSA, NSF Big Data Regional Innovation Hubs Engage local and state governments, local industry and nonprofits, and regional academic institutions in big data research and education to address fundamental issues in data science research and training with a focus on regional issues NSF Big Data Scientist Training Enhancement Program Provide a graduate level fellowship program that delivers training in understanding, managing, and applying big data and modeling in health services, clinical, and or bioinformatics research settings, aimed at innovation to improve healthcare NCI, VA 32 See also Section 5 on the National AI Research Institutes.  3. Key Activities of the NITRD PCAs and IWGs NITRD and NAIIO Supplement to the President s FY2022 Budget 41 Electronics for Networking and Information Technology ENIT PCA Note This NITRD PCA was approved by the NITRD Subcommittee and by NSTC in May 2021 for addition to the NITRD family of PCAs. FY2022 preliminary agency investments in the ENIT PCA are included in the budget tables in Section 2. Detailed information on agency activities for the ENIT PCA will be included online and in the FY2023 NITRD Supplement to the President s Budget. ENIT R D advances micro and nanoelectronics design, architecture, validation, and testing across the networking and information technology hardware design stack this includes methodologies for scalable energy efficient systems, silicon and or non silicon technologies, and implementations in computing and communications architectures.  3. Key Activities of the NITRD PCAs and IWGs 42 NITRD and NAIIO Supplement to the President s FY2022 Budget Enabling R D for High Capability Computing Systems EHCS PCA EHCS R D advances high capability computing and development of fundamentally new approaches in high capability computing this includes R D in hardware and hardware subsystems, software, architectures, system performance, computational algorithms, data analytics, development tools, and software methods for extreme data and compute intensive workloads. High End Computing HEC IWG Participating Agencies DOD, DARPA, DOE NNSA, DOE SC, NASA, NIH, NIST, NOAA, NSA, NSF, OSD, USGS The HEC IWG coordinates Federal R D that extends U.S. leadership in advanced computing and enables transformative research to support the Nation s economic competitiveness, security, and leadership in science and engineering. EHCS research ensures the development of technologies critical to preparing for the next computing revolution and to overcoming challenges critical to ensuring continued progress in computing capabilities while ensuring that these technology advancements support national priorities. Advances in high capability computing HCC impact the full spectrum of devices and open innovation prospects in areas such as precision medicine, advanced manufacturing, and autonomous machines. Strategic Priorities and Associated Key Programs 1. Research and develop the innovative approaches and technologies that are critical to the delivery of extreme scale heterogeneous computing systems to increase scientific insight and accelerate new discoveries. Key programs Exascale Computing Project ECP Continue to prepare for the sustainable delivery of the exascale software and systems DOE NNSA, DOE SC Investigate interconnect and network technologies and explore advanced architectures DOE NNSA Research and develop the software stack for highly heterogenous HCC, and develop domain aware AI algorithms, programming tools, and runtime environments to support new AI workflows DOE SC Benchmark emerging architectures to understand limits of scalability for strategic applications HPCMP Advance extreme scale computing systems Enhance testbed computing programs to test various architecture options, and continue to modernize applications by developing algorithms and preparing scientific applications to ensure software performance and portability on new architectures NASA Develop new methods to compress and store data to simplify computation access to these resources NIH Study scaling and efficiency of current and future algorithms for various computing architectures, including performance I O, scaling, and using AI to tune parameters for codes DOD, DOE SC, NASA, NOAA, NSF Principles and Practices of Scalable Systems program Support research to increase scalability in large scale parallel computer systems NSF  3. Key Activities of the NITRD PCAs and IWGs NITRD and NAIIO Supplement to the President s FY2022 Budget 43 2. Research and develop technologies to make breakthroughs in HCC s most pressing challenges and pioneer new digital and nondigital computing frontiers to take computing beyond Moore s Law for fueling innovations and discoveries that will shape the future computing ecosystem. Key programs Develop AI enabled high performance simulation and computing technologies DOE NNSA Continue research to advance quantum computing, information science, and networking DOE NNSA, DOE SC, NASA, NIST, NSA, NSF Develop software tools or bio inspired algorithms for neuromorphic computing DOE SC, NIST Develop superconducting, optoelectronic computation devices NIST Explore and adapt highly integrated high performance architectures and non von Neumann architectures to strategic applications and exploit state of the art neuromorphic and deep learning accelerators for traditional, edge, and physics based ML HPCMP, NRL 3. Research and develop new approaches and techniques to improve programmability, portability, and usability of high capability computing to boost the productivity of the HCC ecosystem. Key programs ECP Continue to develop programming models to address performance portability for next generation node architectures DOE SC Leverage Federal agency research, development, and demonstrations of algorithms, tools, libraries, workflows, data management, data analysis, and visualization to enable DOD productivity on next generation architectures HPCMP Develop data and computing services in the cloud, and support code porting and algorithm development projects for software performance and portability on new architectures NASA Build a cloud based data science ecosystem, including tools NIH Identify software abstractions for parallelism targeting high end heterogeneous compute node at scale NIST Software Engineering for Novel Architectures Continue to support this program to refactor critical codes such that newer, nontraditional architecture can be leveraged for increased performance NOAA 4. Develop the future HEC workforce. See the EdW PCA. Key Coordination Activities Enhance research in cancer and drug discovery with HCC capabilities Continue collaborations in analytics, and tools and support projects. DOE NNSA, DOE SC, NIH Project 38 Explore vendor agnostic architectural options. DOE NNSA, DOE SC, NSA NSTC Subcommittee on Future Advanced Computing Ecosystem FACE Participate in the work of the Subcommittee and support drafting of the FACE Strategic Plan implementation roadmap. HEC IWG agencies, other agencies  3. Key Activities of the NITRD PCAs and IWGs 44 NITRD and NAIIO Supplement to the President s FY2022 Budget High Capability Computing Infrastructure and Applications HCIA PCA HCIA investments advance operation and utilization of systems and infrastructure for high capability computing, including computation and data intensive systems and applications directly associated software, communications, storage, and data management infrastructure and other resources supporting high capability computing. High End Computing IWG Participating Agencies DOD, DOE NNSA, DOE SC, NASA, NIH, NIST, NOAA, NSA, NSF, OSD, USGS In addition to coordinating EHCS R D, the HEC IWG coordinates Federal activities to provide HCC systems and infrastructure including expertise necessary to effectively use the HCC systems and develop algorithms and applications to accelerate scientific discoveries and technological innovations in areas such as advanced weapons, materials discovery and design, energy applications, Earth and space science, early stage research of advanced technologies, detection and treatment of diseases, forecasting and hazard response planning, and many other S E applications vital to our Nation. Strategic Priorities and Associated Key Programs 1. Acquire, operate, and provide to researchers HCC systems with the varying capabilities required to meet critical national needs and support research and education across all S E areas. Key programs Continue operations and provide leadership class HCC at Leadership Computing Facilities Argonne Theta, Aurora and Oak Ridge Summit, Frontier , and deploy the Perlmutter supercomputer at the National Energy Research Scientific Computing Center DOE SC DOD Supercomputing Resource Centers Provide computing capacity and capability to the DOD community at various levels of classification and provide HPC in Cloud HPCMP NASA High End Computing Portfolio Provide HCC capability to NASA S E communities and computational projects NASA Provide HCC for AI DL research NIST Research and Development High Performance Computing System Provide researchers and collaborators access to HCC systems NOAA Provide and support HCC through the Leadership Class Computing program and the National Center for Atmospheric Research Wyoming Supercomputing Center program HCC resources through the Advanced Computing Systems and Services program and campus HCC clusters through the Major Research Instrumentation program NSF Advanced Research Computing Provide computational platforms for development and exploration of scientific codes USGS 2. Develop algorithms and applications software for current and next generation HCC platforms to maintain and improve the performance of existing codes to support and advance applications vital to the Nation s security and economy and individual well being.  3. Key Activities of the NITRD PCAs and IWGs NITRD and NAIIO Supplement to the President s FY2022 Budget 45 Key programs Scientific Discovery through Advanced Computing partnerships Maximize effective use of current HCC platforms for science, and continue to prepare algorithms, applications, and workflows for current and next generation HCC platforms DOE SC Develop DOD multiphysics applications and enhance and optimize applications and algorithms to address DOD research, development, test and evaluation, and acquisition engineering requirements HPCMP Modeling, Analysis, and Prediction Modernize models, port codes, and refactor major applications to next generation HCC platforms NASA Develop analytics and algorithms, and support multiscale modeling of biomedical processes for improved disease treatment and advancing understanding of the human body NIH Develop algorithms, modeling tools, and computation methods for measurement science applications NIST Computational and Data Enabled Science and Engineering program Support research in new algorithms and techniques in computational and data analysis to enable major S E breakthroughs NSF Continue to develop and enhance applications and models for hazard response and forecasting and develop the pipelines involving simulations and analytics USGS 3. Develop and provide an HCC ecosystem to a diverse user community, including facilities and resources, and enhance the infrastructure and ecosystem needed to support U.S. leadership in S E. Key programs DOE allocation programs Provide researchers access to and support in using leadership computing facility resources DOE SC Provide DOD users computational tools, enterprise administration and user support, computational expertise, HCC in the cloud interfaces, and HCC systems and networking HPCMP Develop and provide computing and data services in the cloud to NASA S E and open science projects NASA STRIDES initiative Create an interoperable data ecosystem by federating the NIH cloud enabled data platform to provide accessible computational and data storage capabilities for biomedical research NIH Support the Partnership to Advance Throughput Computing the Cyberinfrastructure for Sustained Scientific Innovation Program to develop integrated cyberinfrastructure software and data services and the Extreme Science and Engineering Discovery Environment XSEDE to provide support for HCC, storage, visualization, and data services NSF Provide on premises cloud hybrid HCC systems, data management services, and file systems USGS 4. Develop resources and tools to lower barriers to HCC access, improve usability, and support collaborations as means to increase productivity and impact. See also Key Coordination Activities. Key programs Develop and provide ECP software development kits to the community, and continue to support the DOE National Energy Research Scientific Computing Center and Oak Ridge and Argonne  3. Key Activities of the NITRD PCAs and IWGs 46 NITRD and NAIIO Supplement to the President s FY2022 Budget Leadership Computing Facilities, including training, outreach, and application readiness for future system upgrades DOE SC HPC Portal Develop intuitive interfaces to provide users seamless and secure access to DOD HCC environments, including cloud HPCMP Develop web based HPC application interfaces and continue to consolidate code repositories and support open source code development and use of GitHub to enhance collaboration and enable community development NASA Develop tools for modeling and analysis for biomedical research NIH XSEDE Support outreach and educational activities to lower barriers to access for students and underrepresented groups NSF Establish a framework for an Earth system predictive capability that integrates data, models, and tools incorporating modern information technologies USGS Key Coordination Activities HCC and HCC resources Provide and support the HCC systems and the HCC resources necessary for effective use of HCC systems. DOE SC, HPCMP, NASA, NIH, NSF, USGS Provide HCC compute core hours33 for applications vital to the Nation. DOE SC, HPCMP, NASA, NIH, NSF Hydro Terrestrial Earth Systems Develop a community computational testbed. DOE SC, NSF, USGS 33 Term for the number of processor units cores used to run a simulation multiplied by the duration of the job in hours.  3. Key Activities of the NITRD PCAs and IWGs NITRD and NAIIO Supplement to the President s FY2022 Budget 47 Intelligent Robotics and Autonomous Systems IRAS PCA IRAS R D advances intelligent robotic systems this includes R D in robotics hardware and software design and application, machine perception, cognition and adaptation, mobility and manipulation, human robot interaction, distributed and networked robotics, and increasingly autonomous systems. Intelligent Robotics and Autonomous Systems IWG Participating Agencies Army, DHS, DOD, DOI, DOJ, DOT, FAA, NASA, Navy, NIH, NIJ, NIOSH, NIST, NMIO, NRC, NRO, NSA, NSF, OSD, USAF, USDA The IRAS IWG coordinates Federal R D in accelerating the development and use of IRAS in workplaces, hospitals, communities, and homes. IRAS targets R D for robust, safe, ethical, resilient, and efficient robots and advanced robotics systems that assist people in their work and everyday lives. Strategic Priorities and Associated Key Programs 1. Advance safe, efficient human robot teaming and interactions to increase quality of work and life. Key programs Mind, Machine, and Motor Nexus and Robust Intelligence NSF Space Technology Research Grants and Aeronautics University Leadership Initiative NASA NRI 3.0 DOT, NASA, NIH, NIOSH, NSF, USDA Inclusive Design Challenge and Complete Trip ITS4US Deployment Program DOT FHWA ITS JPO Robot Assisted Cognitive Training for Socially Isolated Older Adults with Mild Impairment and Social Assistive Robot Interface for People with Alzheimer s and Other Dementia to Aid in Care Management NIH Risk Factors with Robot Related Workplace Injuries Safety Features and Interventions and Human Robot Interface and Safety Communication NIOSH Research on countering unmanned aircraft systems NIJ Performance of Human Robot Interaction NIST Cognitive Systems for Human Machine Teaming and Science of Autonomy Navy 2. Improve intelligent physical systems to robustly sense, model, act, plan, learn, and behave ethically in complex and uncertain situations. Key programs Dynamical Systems and Control Theory USAF AI for Maneuver and Mobility and Convergence of Lethality, Protection, and Autonomy to Dominate Ground Combat Army Game Changing Development Smart and Autonomous Systems for Space and NASA Innovative Advanced Concepts NASA Helping to End Addiction Long term programs NIH Safety Standards, Certifications, and Regulations and Research based Workplace Fatality Investigations and Injury Surveillance NIOSH Measurement Science for Manufacturing Robots NIST  3. Key Activities of the NITRD PCAs and IWGs 48 NITRD and NAIIO Supplement to the President s FY2022 Budget Performance of Human Robot Interaction DOD, NIST, NRL Foundational Research in Robotics and Future of Work at the Human Technology Frontier NSF Assured Development and Operations of Autonomous Systems Autonomous Mobility Through Intelligent Collaboration and Science of Autonomy OSD, tri services, academic and industry partners 3. Advance wearable robotic fabrics and systems, including exoskeletons and exosuits. Key programs Army Futures Command Exoskeleton Capabilities Development Army Compliant and Configurable Soft Robotics Engineering DOD, NSF AI to Address Chronic Disease NIH NASA Space Technology Research Grant NASA Automated Exo Suit Ergonomic Assessment Navy Exoskeletons for Construction, Manufacturing, Mining, and Healthcare NIOSH Mobility Performance of Robotic Systems NIST Disability and Rehabilitation Engineering NSF 4. Improve resilience in robotics and its applications. Key programs Combat Vehicle Robotics Autonomy Engineering Evaluation Testing Army Applied Information Systems Research Concepts for Ocean Worlds Life Detection Technology and Space Technology Research Grants NASA Smart and Connected Health NIH, NSF Hardiness of robotic systems in harsh mining environments NIOSH Agility Performance of Robotic Systems NIST Critical Tests for Machine Understanding for Human Machine Teaming OSD 5. Promote ethics and broader participation in robotics. Key programs Bridge2AI NIH Research on Emerging Technologies for Teaching and Learning NSF Key Coordination Activities PI meetings Review research, identify new applications, and discuss S T gaps and barriers. AFOSR, DHS, DOD, DOE, DOT, NASA, Navy, NIFA, NIH, NIOSH, NIST, NSA, NSF, ONR, USDA Advanced Robotics for Manufacturing Institute Develop open source, interoperable performance metrics and test methods. Army, NASA, Navy, NIOSH, NIST, USAF, and academic and industry partners Metrics, Evaluation, and Software Infrastructure Develop open source metrics, performance test methods, and interoperability. Army, Navy, NIST, USAF, and industry partners Lunar Surface Innovation Consortium Advance lunar surface exploration. NASA, academic and industry partners OSHA NIOSH Alliance Program Increase workplace safety related to intelligent and autonomous systems, share technical knowledge and best practices, improve hazard  3. Key Activities of the NITRD PCAs and IWGs NITRD and NAIIO Supplement to the President s FY2022 Budget 49 awareness, and identify research on collaborative robot technologies and systems. NIOSH, OSHA, industry partners Safety and other standards development ASTM Committees E54 on Homeland Security Applications and F48 on Exoskeletons and Exosuits Manufacturing Robot and other Safety Standards Develop set terminology, safety, and performance standards for robots, industrial vehicles, exoskeletons, mobile manipulators, etc. DHS, DOD, DOE, DOI, DOJ, FAA, NIH, NIOSH, NIST, NRC, NRL, OSHA, State Drone Safety Standards Participate in the Unmanned Aircraft Systems Standardization Collaborative, and add worker safety considerations to the ANSI Roadmap. ANSI, DHS, DOI, FAA, ITA, NASA, NIST Trusted Autonomy Identify and prioritize development of self sustaining and reliable technologies that are certified for mission use. DOD, NASA, NRL, NRO, USAF Stocktake Autonomy and AI Working Group Engage in bilateral efforts on autonomy and AI enabled brigade support collaboration infrastructure and enablers joint autonomy and AI toolbox and research in autonomous and AI based systems. OUSD R E, DOD Service Labs, Defence Science and Technology Laboratory UK Technology Cooperation Sub Committee TCSC Autonomy and AI Working Group Work bilaterally with the Republic of Korea ROK on cyber and drone defense, autonomous situation awareness, scalable teaming, unmanned ground robots. DOD service labs, OUSD R E, ROK ADD  3. Key Activities of the NITRD PCAs and IWGs 50 NITRD and NAIIO Supplement to the President s FY2022 Budget Large Scale Data Management and Analysis LSDMA PCA LSDMA R D advances extraction of knowledge and insights from data this includes R D of the capture, curation, provenance, management, access, analysis, and presentation of large, diverse, often multisource, data. Big Data BD IWG Participating Agencies Army, Census, DARPA, DHS, DOE NNSA, DOE SC, NARA, NASA, NIH, NIST, NOAA, NRO, NSA, NSF, OSD, USAF, USGS The BD IWG coordinates Federal R D to enable effective analysis, decision making, and discovery based on large, diverse, real time data. LSDMA R D expands big data, data science capabilities to collect, store, access, reuse, analyze, and provide governance for big data accelerating scientific discovery and innovation, providing the foundation for algorithm driven businesses, and creating new capabilities critical to the Nation. Strategic Priorities and Associated Key Programs 1. Maximize the use of large scale data resources through foundational research of innovative tools and methodologies to solve problems of national and societal importance. Key programs Cloud Research Environments Census Cybersecurity and Critical Infrastructure DHS Chios Permissioned Blockchain DHS, NIST, NSF Research in in situ data management, storage system and I O, data analysis and visualization, and codesign of AI ML technologies with data models, applications, and emerging hardware DOE SC Helping to End Addiction Long term Initiative NIH Transdisciplinary Research in Principles of Data Science Computational and Data Enabled Science and Engineering and Principles and Practice of Scalable Systems NSF 2. Advance the trustworthiness, reliability, accuracy, performance, generalizability, and ethical integrity of data driven discovery and decision making to better support innovation in S T and IotF. Key programs Semantic Forensics DARPA National AI Research Institute for Trustworthy AI DHS, NSF Fundamental research into scientific machine learning DOE SC NCI Cancer Research Data Commons NIH Harnessing the Data Revolution Institutes for Data Intensive Research in Science and Engineering Phase I, Secure and Trustworthy Cyberspace NSF AI risk management framework NIST 3. Facilitate the discoverability, interoperability, and reusability of diverse data that are scalable and agile enough to meet the needs of innovation. Key programs Next Generation Secure Multiparty Computation Architectures Real time Analytics for Multi latency Multiparty, Metroscale Networks and Rapid Deployment Research and Development Capabilities DHS  3. Key Activities of the NITRD PCAs and IWGs NITRD and NAIIO Supplement to the President s FY2022 Budget 51 FAIR Data and Models for AI ML DOE SC, NIH Cloud Based Interoperability Platforms NIH Big Data Governance and Metadata Management Develop scalable a FAIR data standard framework and a series of data quality standards NIST Convergence Accelerator Cyberinfrastructure for Emerging Science and Engineering Research EarthCube and Cyberinfrastructure for Sustained Scientific Innovation interoperability and reuse of data NSF 4. Support real time analytics by reducing latency between data ingest, analysis, and decision making. Key programs Warfighter Analytics using Smartphones for Health DARPA Real Time Machine Learning DARPA, NSF Real time Analytics for Multi latency, Multi party, Metro scale Networks DHS Develop data and compute infrastructure and research data reduction and co design of data analysis and reuse at scientific user facilities DOE SC Develop methods and analytics for biomedical usage such as real time risk modeling of postoperative complications and predicting heart failures NIH Cyberinfrastructure for Sustained Scientific Innovation real time ML and analytics NSF 5. Build the current and next generation workforce necessary to develop, support, and use all aspects of big data. See the EdW PCA. 6. Transition research to practice by translating R D into operational tools and technologies that enhance U.S. economy, security, and well being. Key programs Rapid Deployment Research and Development Capabilities DHS Small Business Innovation Research Complex Data DOE SC Genomic sequencing to aid pediatric prenatal diagnosis NIH Convergence Accelerator tracks on Open Knowledge Network AI and Future Work and Enabling AI Innovation via Data and Model Sharing NSF Key Coordination Activities Subcommittee on Open Science Participate in interagency coordination of policy around data management and open science. BD IWG agencies, other agencies Follow up work on findings of the 2021 workshop and report on federally supported data repositories Work with other agencies to address the points made in the workshop and make progress on this key data issue. BD IWG agencies, other agencies National AI Research Institutes Focus on larger scale, longer time horizon challenges in foundational and use inspired AI research, and help accelerate the transition of AI innovations into use in many economic sectors. DHS, DOT FHWA ITS JPO, NSF, USDA, industry partners Cooperation between the NITRD AI R D IWG and NITRD Big Data IWG Much of current AI is about ML DL using Big Data, and AI techniques can help in the management of Big Data and in extraction of knowledge and insights from data thus, the two IWGs meet jointly in regularly scheduled meetings throughout the year. NITRD AI R D and Big Data IWGs  3. Key Activities of the NITRD PCAs and IWGs 52 NITRD and NAIIO Supplement to the President s FY2022 Budget Large Scale Networking LSN PCA LSN R D advances networking technologies and services this includes R D in networking architectures, wireless networks, software defined networks, heterogeneous multimedia networks, testbeds, grid and cloud research and infrastructure, network service and cloud computing middleware, identity management, and end to end performance enhancement and performance measurement.34 Advanced Wireless R D Sub PCA Advanced Wireless R D includes Federal spectrum related R D investments that promote efficient use of wireless spectrum through advanced technologies and systems. Large Scale Networking IWG Participating Agencies Army, DARPA, DOD, DOE SC, DREN, FCC, NASA, Navy, NIH, NIST, NOAA, NSA, NSF, NTIA, ODNI, OSD, USAF, USDA, USGS The LSN IWG coordinates Federal R D in networking technologies and services, including network architectures, wired and wireless network infrastructures, grid and cloud middleware research, and communication protocols, to enable robust transfer of data among ground, sea, air, and space systems. Strategic Priorities and Associated Key Programs 1. Develop concepts, techniques, architectures, and protocols for future networks. Key programs Provide connectivity communications in contested and congested environments C5ISR, DARPA, NTIA Assess THz viability for use in Air Force airborne environments AFRL Advance quantum communications and networking AFRL, DOE SC, NIST, NSF Secure data sharing between coalitions across mobile tactical networks DARPA Deploy next generation high performance wide area networks DOE SC, DREN Incorporate AI ML aspects for better adaptation to the communications layer in convergent networks NSF, ONR Develop new technologies, programmable measurement techniques, methodologies, resilient and intelligent next generation networks and systems, and testbeds and demonstration capabilities e.g., 5G architecture and in network computing and storage DARPA, DOD, DOE SC, DREN, NIST, NOAA, NSA, NSF 2. Develop cloud infrastructure enhancements. Key programs Connect tactical information across multiple domains on demand, at scale, and securely AFRL, DARPA Operationalize N Wave cloud broker services and support direct connects to commercial cloud DREN, NOAA Develop roadmaps for adoption of cloud computing technologies and commercial cloud use DOE SC, NIST 34 Both the LSN and WSRD IWGs report under the LSN PCA.  3. Key Activities of the NITRD PCAs and IWGs NITRD and NAIIO Supplement to the President s FY2022 Budget 53 Conduct network technology and systems R D, develop new hardware for future cloud systems, advance reproducibility research for cloud systems, and examine the edge to cloud continuum DOD, NSA, NIST, NSF 3. Develop enhanced, next generation network architecture capabilities for data analytics. Key programs Provide command and control and situational awareness capabilities DARPA, AFRL Enhance advanced, distributed computing architecture capabilities and next generation supercomputing support for science needs DOE SC, DREN, NOAA, NSF Develop end to end, virtualized, programmable, self optimizing network architecture DARPA, NSF, ONR Advance the design of edge computing and edge networking infrastructure, and develop scalable platforms for data analytics for emerging IoT devices NSF Enable standards for robust and state of the art public safety communications analytics NIST Explore the capabilities of AI ML to enhance data analytics on 5G NextG networks NSA, NSF 4. Develop, evaluate, and standardize technologies to achieve security and resilience in emerging wireless networks and multidomain internets and to protect core network infrastructure. Key programs Support research advances as well as development and testing of resilient and intelligent NextG systems DOD, NIST, NSF, industry partners Enhance cybersecurity awareness, protections, and capabilities through developing new services and or tools e.g., cybersecurity for IoT, and AI tools AFRL, C5ISR, DHS S T, DOE SC, DREN, NIST, NOAA, NSF, ONR Support cyber technology innovations for trustworthy and secure networks e.g., 5G and trustworthy AI , data and supply chain security, and infrastructure monitoring C5ISR, DHS S T, DOE SC, NIST, NSA, NSF, ONR 5. Develop technology, standards, testbeds, and tools to improve wireless networks. Key programs Develop nontraditional waveforms and technologies for resilient communications C5ISR, DARPA, NSF Deploy and operate nationwide testbeds supporting performance monitoring and protocol development AFRL, DOE SC, NSF Develop techniques to improve trust, performance, and robustness of wired and wireless networked sensors and control systems NIST, NSF Expand wireless service and deploy rapid, mobile site deployments NOAA Develop and operate testbeds supporting test and evaluation of radio access network disaggregation technologies develop and operate testbeds supporting test and evaluation of open source implementations of next generation network components and develop standards for evolution of spectrum sharing between 5G NextG systems and other incompatible radio systems NSF, NTIA 5G Co existence Testbed sub 6GHz and mm wave Develop fundamental measurement and calibration methods for hybrid radiated plus cabled test approaches that include beamforming and support metrology for emerging 5G spectrum sharing, wireless coexistence, interference characterization and modeling, physical security, and standards development NIST  3. Key Activities of the NITRD PCAs and IWGs 54 NITRD and NAIIO Supplement to the President s FY2022 Budget Key Coordination Activities Pursue distributed infrastructure architectures that integrate instruments, sensors, computers, storage, and networks into a coherent whole. DOD, DOE SC, DREN, NIST, NOAA, NSA, NSF Advance integration of advanced wireless with large scientific instruments. DOD, DOE SC, DREN, NIST, NOAA, NSA, NSF LSN Broadband Research and Development Team Coordinate strategies to address disparities in nationwide broadband access, adoption, and usage, and update the National Broadband Research Agenda. Census, DOE SC, DOI, DOL, FCC, NIJ, NIST, NSF, NTIA, OSD, USDA LSN Joint Engineering Team JET team 35 Coordinate R D activities in networking, advanced technologies, end user requirements, user interfaces, research and storage networks, end to end big data testbeds and metrics, trusted Internet connections, and tools. DOE SC, DREN, FCC, NASA, NIH, NIST, NOAA, NRL, NSF, NTIA Middleware and Grid Interagency Coordination Team MAGIC team 35 Coordinate activities in identity management, distributed computing, middleware, cloud, and grid computing services and information exchanges standards and implementation resource architecture, access, and management best practices and security and privacy. ARS, DOE SC, FCC, NIST, NRL, NSF Wireless Spectrum R D WSRD IWG Participating Agencies Army, DARPA, DEA, DHS, DOD, DOE NNSA, DOE SC, DOJ, FAA, FCC, FDA, NASA, Navy, NIJ, NIST, NOAA, NSF, NTIA, OSD, USAF The WSRD IWG coordinates Federal spectrum related R D activities to facilitate efficient, effective R D investments that promote efficient use of wireless spectrum through advanced technologies and systems. Strategic Priorities and Associated Key Programs 1. Expand communications capacity through the dynamic use of multiple frequency bands, modulation techniques, or spectrum sharing methods. Key programs Develop air to air capability for long range ultrabroadband terahertz communications understand mmWave channel characteristics in real life deployments and demonstrate effective, secure unmanned aircraft system and wideband communications in mmWave bands AFRL, DOE NE, NIST, NSF, NTIA Develop laser airborne terminals with RF networking for increased capacity and robustness and capabilities to move data into and out of space infuse RF capabilities in higher frequency bands characterize channel effects and improve beacon transmission and data collection AFRL, NASA, NIST, NRL, NSF, USAF Deliver adaptable waveforms that are tailored to the mission and spectral environment and manage interference with tactical infrastructure AFRL, Army CCDC C5ISR S TCD, DARPA, NASA, Navy Enable wireless communications that are spectrum efficient, energy efficient, secure, and adaptable for co location and relocation through development of new methods, models, and measurements, along with appropriate definitions of spectrum efficiency across space, frequency, 35 Both the JET and MAGIC teams hold information sharing meetings among Federal and non Federal participants.  3. Key Activities of the NITRD PCAs and IWGs NITRD and NAIIO Supplement to the President s FY2022 Budget 55 and time, including for new 5G systems C5ISR S TCD, DARPA, DHS, DOE NE, DEA, DOD, FCC, NIST, NSF, NTIA Develop mid band propagation modeling and analyze effects of radar sharing with new 5G systems DOD, NSF, NTIA 2. Identify and support capabilities for devices to monitor their spectrum environments and adapt in real time, including threat assessments and vulnerability detection. Key programs Electromagnetic Spectrum Monitoring Share spectrum situational awareness using ML, visualization, and network based techniques for collaborative planning and decentralized decision making and develop infrastructure and best practices to acquire data and facilitate data sharing AFRL, DARPA, DHS S T, DOE NE, FCC, NIST, NSF, NTIA, OSD Develop signal processing techniques for passive and active RF sensors to detect and remove and or mitigate effects of RF interference NASA, NSF Develop ML techniques for spectrum access systems and environmental sensing capability sensors and systems for signal classification DARPA, DOD, DEA, FCC, DOE NE, NIST, NSF, NTIA Address fundamental needs of spectrum sharing via spectrum sensing and modeling address wireless coexistence metrology and develop new metrology tools for 5G communications systems to ensure trusted spectrum sharing NIST, NSF Implement innovative approaches to enhance communication and network security, including RF, analog, mixed signal, protocol, and or algorithmic techniques NSF Conduct integration and independent testing of new and emerging technologies e.g., IoT, 5G DHS S T 3. Develop trustworthy data driven algorithms and analytics to inform spectrum policy and management. Key programs Use data science and ML to eliminate assumption driven decision making NSF, NTIA Develop algorithms to support cognitive management of multiple radios operating in the same environment DEA, DOJ, NSF Leverage sensing data to access spectrum, and leverage AI frameworks to ensure effective spectrum utilization and coordination NSF Develop algorithms using RF data, and develop curated data sets and methodology for AI ML NIST, NSF Utilize frequency selection and analytical techniques to improve NASA s spectrum access NASA 4. Pursue R D leading to robust, resilient, and reliable spectrum dependent systems and networks that promote electromagnetic spectrum compatibility, coexistence, and reuse. Key programs Provide secure tactical intranetworking for military communications through multibeam directional connectivity and airborne data exchange between security domains, and improve unmanned aircraft system security measures AFRL, DOE NE, Navy, NSA Deploy experimental networks and explore trust and coexistence between different types of wireless networks expand to 5G wideband encryption and optimized massive MIMO security and enable anti jamming, low probability of detection, interception, and exploitation DEA, DHS, DOE NE, NSF  3. Key Activities of the NITRD PCAs and IWGs 56 NITRD and NAIIO Supplement to the President s FY2022 Budget Support research advances as well as development and testing of resilient and intelligent nextG systems DOD, NIST, NSF, industry partners Develop new ways to evaluate, deploy, and protect wireless systems use AI ML to enable an autonomous communication infrastructure and leverage AI frameworks to ensure effective spectrum utilization and coordination NIST, NSF Develop new metrology to support development and evaluation of industrial IoT NIST Develop evaluation methods for 5G and beyond system integration in mission critical applications, adequate test methods for 5G enabled medical devices, and medical device wireless coexistence evaluation methods for emerging technologies FDA 5. Accelerate deployment of spectrum R D into usable tools via testing, modeling, and simulation. Key programs Hybrid RF Optical Link Adaptation Risk reduction and Stockbridge Controllable Contested Environment AFRL, FAA, NASA, NRL Platforms for Advanced Wireless Research and National Radio Dynamic Zones NSF 5G Coexistence Testbed NIST Establish accurate measurements, system calibrations, technology, and models to address challenges in next generation wireless communications, spectrum sharing, and wireless coexistence develop testing methods in measurement science and maintain publicly available web based tools DOE NE, NIST, NTIA Enhance DOE National Laboratory test facilities, e.g., Next Generation Wireless Test Bed DOE NE Future Cities Testing DOE NE and Extreme Environments Testing DOE NNSA Develop realistic deep generative ML models for RF waveforms and key performance indicators to support rapid interference testing and characterization of black box communication systems NIST Key Coordination Activities Advanced Wireless Test Platform Working Group Organize interagency coordination on wireless test platforms to ensure access to a nationwide set of diverse testbeds. DHS CISA, DHS S T, DOD, DOE SC, DOT, FCC, NASA, NIST, NOAA, NSF, NTIA 5G Millimeter Wave Channel Model Alliance Facilitate global efforts to define the radio channels where next generation 5G wireless will operate. NIST, NSF, NTIA Spectrum Innovation Zones Enable testing of new wireless devices, communication techniques, networks, systems, and services in real environments. FCC, NSF National Advanced Spectrum and Communications Test Network Coordinate spectrum sharing and coexistence studies among Federal, academic, and industry spectrum users supply robust tests and validated measurement data to develop, evaluate, and deploy spectrum sharing technologies. DOD, NASA, NIST, NOAA, NSF, NTIA  3. Key Activities of the NITRD PCAs and IWGs NITRD and NAIIO Supplement to the President s FY2022 Budget 57 Software Productivity, Sustainability, and Quality SPSQ PCA SPSQ R D advances timely and affordable development and sustainment of low defect, low vulnerability software this includes R D to significantly improve software production processes productivity, quality, and understanding of the economics of software and its development sustainability, measurement, assurance, and adaptability and guarantees of essential requirements such as security, privacy, usability, reliability, and autonomy. Software Productivity, Sustainability, and Quality IWG Participating Agencies Army, BLS, CDC, DHS, FDA, GSA, IARPA, NASA, Navy, NIH, NIJ, NIST, NOAA, NRC, NSA, NSF, NTIA, OSD, USAF The SPSQ IWG coordinates Federal R D to achieve orders of magnitude reduction in software defects and the time and cost of developing and sustaining software. The U.S. Government and the national economy depend on increasingly complex software improved software development technology is essential to U.S. innovation, to leadership in emerging technologies, and to security and prosperity. Strategic Priorities and Associated Key Programs 1. Advance timely, affordable development and sustainment of low defect, low vulnerability software through transformative research in design, production and evolution, verification, operation, utilization, and evaluation of computer software. Key programs Software Foundations Support transformative research in design, verification, operation, utilization, and evaluation of computer software, including in software S E to transform relationships between requirements, design, and evolution formal methods for specification, development, and verification of software systems and design and implementation of programming languages and compilers DOD, NASA, NSF Software Engineering for Novel Architectures Employ existing techniques and develop and deploy new ones to productively rewrite and refactor software models for nontraditional architectures and future exascale computers DOD, DOE, NASA, NOAA, academic partners Secure Software Engineering Fund basic and applied research on techniques, methods, and tools for detecting and mitigating software vulnerabilities and malware through software analysis and testing formal methods to represent vulnerabilities designed in security and privacy capabilities during software development and more AFRL, NASA, NIST, NSF, ONR Conduct research and develop guidelines on the use of hardware roots of trust to secure information and information systems DOD, NASA, NIST Tools to Quantify and Assure Agile Software Development Automate testing and analyses enhance rapid development of and acquire secure software and automate evidence generation and construction of assurance arguments AFRL, NSF Cyberinfrastructure for Sustained Scientific Innovation Support research that addresses emerging needs in scientific software cyberinfrastructure and serves large, multidisciplinary research communities NASA, NSF 2. Advance software productivity, sustainability, and quality in high priority areas such as AI, computational science and engineering, cybersecurity, and future software defined networking.  3. Key Activities of the NITRD PCAs and IWGs 58 NITRD and NAIIO Supplement to the President s FY2022 Budget Key programs Novel Optically Diverse Applications Research and develop prototypes that will scale early cycle cyber vulnerability assessments, including of embedded systems, by using learning algorithms to automate the process AFRL System Wide Safety Project Develop, deploy, and transfer technology to support software assurance and productivity in aerospace systems that are software intensive and increasingly autonomous AFRL, DOD, FAA, NASA, industry partners Software Supplements Make strategic investments to enable biomedical analysis software to be enhanced for open science and use in the cloud NIH Software Assurance Metrics, Tool Evaluation, and Advanced Testing Provide standard reference data for flawed and fixed code through the Software Assurance Reference Dataset, and run a periodic evaluation of static analysis tools and mathematically define selection of attributes to reduce the cost and increase the effectiveness of high assurance software IARPA, NASA, NIST, NRC, NSA AI and Software Engineering Advance software development processes and techniques for development of DL based applications and systems. Also, apply AI to improving software development tasks, analysis of existing software and restructuring of software systems, and using statistical language techniques from natural language for software NASA, NIST, NSF, ONR Software Asset Management Standards and Guidelines Develop a sustainable, standardized approach to collect and maintain inventories of software, including software patches, from endpoints DHS, DOD, NASA, NIST 3. Develop the current and future SPSQ workforce by supporting STEM education and training by supplying and sustaining the necessary resources such as software libraries, tools, and platforms to support teaching and research and by advancing software proficiency and development capabilities in government organizations and government led projects. See the EdW PCA. Key Coordination Activities Earth System Prediction Capability Coordinate across the Federal environmental research and operational prediction communities to improve global prediction, including by identifying hardware and software challenges and R D needs. DOE, Navy, NASA, NOAA, NSF, USAF Joint Federated Assurance Centers Support robust, secure software development. DOD, USAF International collaborations o Global Alliance for Genomics and Health Work with global members in developing data sharing standards in genomics and healthcare, and provide research funding for essential software components. NIH   NITRD and NAIIO Supplement to the President s FY2022 Budget 59 4. Other NITRD Interagency Coordination Activities Health Information Technology R D HITRD IWG 36 Participating agencies AHRQ, Army, CDC, CMS, DOD, FDA, HHS, HRSA, NIH, NIST, NSF, ONC, VA The HITRD IWG coordinates R D aimed at improving the health of Americans by advancing technologies that support personalized health screening, monitoring, diagnosis, and treatment disease prevention emergency response broad access to healthcare information and resources and building and sustaining a diverse and highly skilled health IT workforce. Strategic Priorities and Associated Key Programs 1. Accelerate R D and implementation of next generation accessible, interoperable, reconfigurable health IT tools, devices, and services to enhance disease self monitoring, diagnosis, treatment, and prevention, and reduce regulatory and administrative burdens. Key program areas Develop and implement clinical decision support systems AHRQ, CDC, CMS, NIH, VA Develop, test, and implement open source, clinician and patient facing medical applications, reusable technologies, and fast healthcare interoperability resources ACL, AHRQ, CMS, HRSA, IHS, NIH, ONC, SAMHSA, VA Accelerate the use of standardized application programming interfaces and third party applications to reduce the effort it takes to access, exchange, and use electronic health information AHRQ, NIH, ONC Collect, exchange, and integrate patient generated digital health data into an electronic health record EHR system AHRQ, NIH, NSF, ONC, USAMRDC Design real time systems to semiautonomously or completely control medical devices for monitoring and treatment NIH, NSF, USAMRDC, VA Improve advanced medical care at a distance that connects specialty providers with patient data and EHR integration for situational awareness USAMRDC, VA Implement and evaluate consensus based recommendations for best practices AHRQ, CDC, FDA Support next generation Health IT technologies that enable faster and safer development of new products for the bioeconomy FDA, NIST, NSF 2. Promote findable, accessible, interoperable, reusable health and biomedical data to support development of new insights from AI. Key program areas Utilize advance computing resources and data to enhance clinical trials and discover new approaches for optimizing health AHRQ, NIH, NSF Develop interoperable, standards based, secure medical architecture for data and devices to enhance decisions using AI FDA, NIST, NSF, ONC, USAMRDC Validate and refine claims based data to identify patients risk and status ACL, AHRQ, NCHS, NIH, ONC 36 Distinct from other IWGs, HITRD IWG agencies report funding to various PCAs including CHuman, CNPS, EdW, and IRAS depending on the focus areas of the agencies.  4. Other NITRD Interagency Coordination Activities 60 NITRD and NAIIO Supplement to the President s FY2022 Budget Support the development of cloud based data and analysis ecosystems to enhance research and development including supporting research networks for prevention, surveillance, monitoring, and conducting clinical studies NIH, NIOSH, NSF, USAMRDC Enhance the semantic interoperability of medical devices NIH, NIST, NSF, ONC, USAMRDC Develop advanced Internet of Things networking frameworks and evaluation testbeds to enhance the collection of information about health status from the lived environment NIST, NSF Generate large, diverse data and methods to enhance pandemic prediction NIH, NSF, USAMRDC Advance the findability, accessibility, interoperability, and reuse of health data and metadata standards AHRQ, CDC, DHA, FDA, NIH, ONC, VA 3. Develop appropriate privacy preserving, secure methods and data transfer strategies, and support implementation of standards and certification to enhance trust and confidence in health and biomedical systems. Key program areas Secure remote patient monitoring and medical image exchange FDA, NIH, NIST, NSF, USAMRDC Enhance certification by developing standards, implementation specifications, certification criteria, and testing specifications FDA, NIST, ONC Create new methods for secure data sharing and transfers that support privacy and security DOD, NSF 4. Provide education and training opportunities to build the diverse, highly skilled, interdisciplinary health IT workforce of the future. See the EdW PCA. Key Coordination Activities Implement the 21st Century Cures Act, including the Brain Research through Advancing Innovative Neurotechnologies, Cancer Moonshot, and Precision Medicine Initiative. FDA, IARPA, NIH, NSF, ONC Implement the Federal Health IT Strategic Plan 2020 2025 Follow this Federal Government guidance for using health IT to promote secure access of all parties to electronic health information to improve patient health, including through education and training programs. All HITRD agencies Advance the use of AI in healthcare. All HITRD agencies Promote the Safe and Trustworthy Computing and Smart and Connected Health programs. NIH, NSF Coordinate the health IT related response to the COVID 19 pandemic. All HITRD agencies   NITRD and NAIIO Supplement to the President s FY2022 Budget 61 5. Overview of the National Artificial Intelligence Research Institutes Introduction In passing the National Artificial Intelligence Initiative Act of 2020,37 Congress recognized that advances in AI will strengthen innovation across multiple sectors, including, but not limited to health, education, manufacturing, agriculture, security, energy, and environment. NAIIA calls for NSF to lead Federal agencies in providing investments to jump start these innovations through National AI Research Institutes AI Institutes . The investments will address sector specific or cross cutting challenges e.g., trustworthiness relevant to the application of AI in those sectors or in AI systems broadly and translate the research into products, applications, and services. The NAIIA requires, among other provisions, that the AI Institutes be formed among multi dimensional partnerships of public and private entities address the ethical, societal, safety, and security implications of AI R D and support interdisciplinary R D across multiple institutions of higher education, development of interdisciplinary education activities, and development of an AI workforce across all U.S. communities, including those that are historically underrepresented in S T. As of August 2021, Institutes address multiple AI R D themes, and the Institutes numerous partners are located in 40 states and several countries. This section serves as the FY2022 annual report on the status of the series of AI Institutes as called for in the National Artificial Intelligence Initiative Act of 2020. The subsections below provide an overview of NSF led and other AI Institutes launched since NAIIA was enacted. Tables 3 and 4 in Section 2 provide the actual, enacted, and requested investments by Federal agencies for both NSF led and other agencies AI Institutes for FYs 2020 2022. NSF Led AI Institutes, by R D Theme NSF established five initial AI Institutes in 2020 spanning five research themes with a projected investment over five years of approximately 20 million each in planned partnerships with several other Federal agencies. In 2021, NSF established nine additional Institutes spanning six research themes, also at about 20 million over five years.38 Institute themes span both fundamental AI R D and R D for AI driven innovation in specific domains. Through a joint program with NSF, USDA NIFA established two AI Institutes each in 2020 and 202139 addressing AI driven innovation in agriculture and the food system, with similar investment, bringing the roster of AI Institutes to 18. The summary descriptions below of NSF led AI Institutes grouped by R D themes name Institute focus areas, funding, lead and participating institutions, and private partners and collaborators as of August 2021.40 Theme AI in Computer and Network Systems AI Institute for Edge Computing Leveraging Next Generation Networks also known as Athena DHS, NSF 2021 Focus Develop edge computing with groundbreaking AI functionality while keeping complexity and costs under control. Bringing together a world class, multidisciplinary team of scientists, engineers, statisticians, legal scholars and psychologists from seven universities, it will transform 37 Title LII, Secs. 5201 ff. 38 and 39 and nsf invest 220m artificial intelligence research institutes 40 includes frequent updates to participants in the NSF led AI Institutes.  5. Overview of the National Artificial Intelligence Research Institutes 62 NITRD and NAIIO Supplement to the President s FY2022 Budget the design, operation and service of future systems from mobile devices to networks. It is committed to educating and developing the workforce, cultivating a diverse next generation of edge computing and network leaders whose core values are driven by ethics and fairness in AI. As a nexus point for the community, this institute will spearhead collaboration and knowledge transfer, translating emerging technical capabilities to new business models and entrepreneurial opportunities. Funding 20 million total over five years. Primary Organization Duke University Other Principal Organizations Massachusetts Institute of Technology North Carolina A T State University Princeton University University of Illinois University of Illinois Urbana Champaign University of Michigan Ann Arbor University of Washington University of Wisconsin Madison Yale University Partners Collaborators 5NINES AT T Edge Micro Microsoft Motorola Solutions North Carolina School of Science and Mathematics Town of Cary, NC The STEM Early College at North Carolina A T State University More Information AI Institute for Future Edge Networks and Distributed Intelligence AI EDGE DHS, NSF 2021 Focus Leverage the synergies between networking and AI to design future generations of wireless edge networks that are highly efficient, reliable, robust and secure. New AI tools and techniques will be developed to ensure that these networks are self healing and self optimized. Collaboration over these adaptive networks will help solve long standing distributed AI challenges making AI more efficient, interactive, and privacy preserving for applications in sectors such as intelligent transportation, remote healthcare, distributed robotics, and smart aerospace. It will create a research, education, knowledge transfer, and workforce development environment that will help establish U.S. leadership in next generation edge networks and distributed AI for many decades to come. Funding 20 million total over five years. Primary Organization The Ohio State University Other Principal Organizations Carnegie Mellon University Northeastern University Purdue University University of Illinois University of Illinois Urbana Champaign University of Massachusetts University of Michigan University of Texas University of Washington University of Wisconsin Partners Collaborators Air Force Research Laboratory NY Air Force Research Laboratory OH Army Research Laboratory AT T Labs IBM Watson Research Center Microsoft Naval Research Laboratory Qualcomm CA Qualcomm NJ University of Illinois  5. Overview of the National Artificial Intelligence Research Institutes NITRD and NAIIO Supplement to the President s FY2022 Budget 63 More Information Theme AI for Advances in Optimization AI Institute for Advances in Optimization AI4Opt NSF, Industry Partner 2021 Focus Revolutionize decision making on a large scale by fusing AI and mathematical optimization into intelligent systems that will achieve breakthroughs that neither field can achieve independently. The Institute will create pathways from high school to undergraduate and graduate education and workforce development training for AI in engineering that will empower a generation of under represented students and teachers to join the AI revolution. It will also create a sustainable ecosystem for AI, combining education, research, entrepreneurship, and the public at large. The Institute will demonstrate foundational advances on use cases in energy, resilience and sustainability, supply chains, and circuit design and control. It has innovative plans for workforce education and broadening participation, including substantial leadership from a collaborating minority serving institution. Funding 20 million total over five years, including partial funding by Intel. Primary Organization Georgia Institute of Technology Other Principal Organizations Clark Atlanta University Spelman College University of California University of Southern California University of Texas Partners Collaborators Amazon Robotics Atlanta Public Schools Georgia Center of Innovation for Logistics Georgia Dept. of Economic Development Girls Academic Leadership Academy Gurobi Optimization Lawrence Livermore National Laboratory Los Alamos National Laboratory Midcontinent Independent Systems Operator MISO Oak Ridge National Laboratory Ryder UPS More Information AI Institute for Learning Enabled Optimization at Scale TILOS NSF, Industry Partner 2021 Focus Aim to make impossible optimizations possible by addressing the fundamental challenges of scale and complexity. Learning enabled optimization will be applied in several technical focus areas vital to the Nation s health and prosperity, including semiconductor chip design, robotics and networks. The research agenda is accompanied by plans for workforce development and broadening participation at all academic levels, from middle school to advanced research levels, including community outreach efforts to promote AI. Funding 20 million total over five years, including partial funding by Intel. Primary Organization University of California San Diego Other Principal Organizations Massachusetts Institute of Technology National University University of Pennsylvania University of Texas Yale University  5. Overview of the National Artificial Intelligence Research Institutes 64 NITRD and NAIIO Supplement to the President s FY2022 Budget Partners Collaborators A Reason to Survive ARTS Allen Institute for Artificial Intelligence Ansys, Inc. Arm, Ltd. Brain Corporation Cadence Design Systems Facebook FIRST Girl Scouts San Diego IBM Mentor Graphics Siemens Microsoft Nvidia Planck Aerosystems, Inc. SACNAS Samsung Austin R D Center, TX Samsung Strategy Innovation Center Silicon Integration Initiative, Inc. Sweetwater Union High School District Synopsis, Inc. TuSimple, Inc. Western Digital CHIPS Alliance XiLinx Inc. More Information Theme AI and Advanced Cyberinfrastructure AI Institute for Intelligent Cyberinfrastructure with Computational Learning in the Environment ICICLE NSF 2021 Focus Build the next generation of cyberinfrastructure that will make AI easy for scientists to use and promote its further democratization. It will transform the AI landscape of today by bringing in scientists from multidisciplinary backgrounds to create a robust, trustworthy, and transparent national cyberinfrastructure that is ready to plug and play in areas of societal importance such as smart food sheds , precision agriculture, and animal ecology. The Institute will develop a new generation of the workforce with sustained diversity and inclusion at all levels. Funding 20 million total over five years. Primary Organization The Ohio State University Other Principal Organizations Case Western Reserve University IC FOODS Indiana University Iowa State University Rensselaer Polytechnic Institute University of California, Davis University of California, San Diego University of Delaware Texas Advanced Computing Center University of Utah University of Wisconsin Madison Partners Collaborators AccessComputing Agricultural Data Coalition AI FARMS AIFS Brookhaven National Laboratory CNH Industrial Computing Alliance of Hispanic Serving Institutions Expanding Pathways in Computing Alliance Fermi National Accelerator Laboratory I Love Farmers Markets IAIFI Indiana University, Jetstream Information Sciences Institute Lawrence Livermore National Laboratory Max Planck Institute Germany Microsoft AI for Earth Mid Ohio Food Collective Molecular Sciences Software Institute National Center for Women and IT National Ecological Observatory Network Battelle  5. Overview of the National Artificial Intelligence Research Institutes NITRD and NAIIO Supplement to the President s FY2022 Budget 65 Nationwide Children s Hospital Princeton University Science Gateways Community Institute Southern California Earthquake Center The Findings Group Trusted CI Institute U.S. Fish and Wildlife Service University of North Carolina University of Stuttgart Germany WildMe More Information Theme AI Augmented Learning AI Institute for Adult Learning and Online Education ALOE NSF, Industry Partner 2021 Focus Lead the country and the world in the development of novel AI theories and techniques for enhancing the quality of adult online education, making this mode of learning comparable to that of in person education in STEM disciplines. Fundamental research in use inspired AI is grounded in theories of human cognition and learning supported by evidence from large scale data, evaluated on a large variety of testbeds, and derived from the scientific process of learning engineering. Along with partners in the technical college systems and educational technology sector, ALOE will advance online learning using virtual assistants to make education more available, affordable, achievable, and equitable. Funding 20 million total over five years, including partial funding by Accenture. Primary Organization Georgia Research Alliance Other Principal Organizations Arizona State University Drexel University Georgia State University Georgia Tech Research Corporation Harvard University Technical College System of Georgia University of North Carolina Greensboro Partners Collaborators Boeing IBM IMS Global Wiley More Information AI Institute for Engaged Learning NSF 2021 Focus Advance natural language processing, computer vision and machine learning to engage learners in AI driven narrative centered learning environments. Rich AI driven virtual agents and powerful multimodal sensing capabilities will support learners and yield transformative advances in STEM teaching and learning. The Institute will serve as a nexus for in school and out of school STEM education innovation, empowering and engaging diverse learners and stakeholders to ensure that AI driven learning environments are ethically designed to promote equity and inclusion. Funding 20 million total over five years. Primary Organization North Carolina State University Other Principal Organizations Digital Promise Global CA Digital Promise Global Washington DC Indiana University Kenan Flagler Business School, University of North Carolina University of North Carolina Vanderbilt University  5. Overview of the National Artificial Intelligence Research Institutes 66 NITRD and NAIIO Supplement to the President s FY2022 Budget Partners Collaborators AI for Teachers Boys Girls Clubs of Bloomington, IN Boys Girls Clubs of the Coastal Plain Code.org Computer Science Teachers Association Computing Research Association CSForALL Durham Public Schools EngageCSEdu Greater Clark County Schools, IN Indiana School for the Deaf Loogootee Community School Corp. Metro Nashville Public Schools Metropolitan School District of Wayne Township, IN Monroe County Community School Corporation, IN Nextech North Carolina Department of Public Instruction North Carolina Museum of Natural Sciences Pitt County Schools, NC STARS Computing Corps Wake County Public School System, NC WonderLab Museum of Science, Health, and Technology More Information AI Institute for Student AI Teaming NSF 2020 Focus Develop groundbreaking AI that helps both students and teachers to work and learn together more effectively, and equitably, while helping educators focus on what they do best inspiring and teaching students. The vision is to develop engaging AI partners that will observe, participate in, and facilitate collaborative STEM learning conversations by interacting naturally through speech, gesture, gaze, and facial expression in real world classrooms and remote learning settings. Funding 20 million total over five years Primary Organization University of Colorado Boulder Principal Organizations Brandeis University Colorado State University Georgia Institute of Technology University of California Berkeley University of California Santa Cruz University of Illinois at Urbana Champaign University of Wisconsin Madison Worcester Polytechnic Institute Partners Collaborators Curve10 Denver Public Schools Project Voyce SparkFun St. Vrain Valley Schools, CO The Op Ed Project More Information Theme AI Driven Innovation in Agriculture and the Food System AI Institute for Future Agricultural Resilience, Management, and Sustainability AI FARMS USDA NIFA 2020 Focus Advance AI research in computer vision, machine learning, soft object manipulation and intuitive human robot interaction to solve major agricultural challenges including labor shortages, efficiency and welfare in animal agriculture, environmental resilience of crops, and the need to safeguard soil health. The institute features a new joint Computer Science Agriculture degree and global clearinghouse to foster collaboration in AI driven agriculture research. Funding 20 million total over five years.  5. Overview of the National Artificial Intelligence Research Institutes NITRD and NAIIO Supplement to the President s FY2022 Budget 67 Primary Organization University of Illinois at Urbana Champaign Other Principal Organizations Donald Danforth Plant Science Center Michigan State University Tuskegee University University of Chicago Partners Collaborators Agco Agrela Ecosystems Benson Hill EarthSense IBM Research John Deere Microsoft Strawn Pork Syngenta Crop Protection More Information AI Institute for Next Generation Food Systems AIFS USDA NIFA 2020 Focus Integrate a holistic view of the food system with AI and bioinformatics to understand biological data and processes, addressing issues of molecular breeding to optimize traits for yield, crop quality, and pest disease resistance agricultural production, food processing and distribution, and nutrition. Major emphasis is on inclusive education and outreach approaches to build a diverse, next generation workforce. Funding 20 million total over five years. Primary Organization University of California, Davis Other Principal Organizations Cornell University University of California Agriculture and Natural Resources University of California, Berkeley University of Illinois Urbana Champaign Partners Collaborators ADM Global headquarters, IL AGR Partners BASF Better Food Ventures Better Ventures Bow Capital Culinary Institute of America, Copia Digestiva Farm Foundation FoodShot Global FTW Ventures Mars, Inc. MISTA Novozymes N. America Headquarters Nuritas, Ltd. Ireland Process Integration Predictive Analytics Sacramento City College The March Fund The Production Board The Rockefeller Foundation headquarters ThermoFisher Scientific Thomas Jefferson Foundation UC Davis Plant Breeding Center UC Davis Seed Biotechnology Center USDA Agricultural Research Service West Hills College Coalinga CA More Information AI Institute for Resilient Agriculture AIIRA USDA NIFA 2021 Focus Transform agriculture through innovative AI driven digital twins that model plants at an unprecedented scale. This approach is enabled by advances in computational theory, AI algorithms, and  5. Overview of the National Artificial Intelligence Research Institutes 68 NITRD and NAIIO Supplement to the President s FY2022 Budget tools for crop improvement and production for resiliency to climate change. In addition, AIIRA will promote the study of cyber agricultural systems at the intersection of plant science, agronomics, and AI power education and workforce development through formal and informal educational activities, focusing on Native American bidirectional engagement and farmer programs and drive knowledge transfer through partnerships with industry, producers, and Federal and State agencies. Funding 20 million total over five years. Primary Organization Iowa State University Other Principal Organizations Carnegie Mellon University George Mason University Iowa Soybean Association New York University University of Arizona University of Missouri University of Nebraska Lincoln UNL Partners Collaborators Agriculture Genome to Phenome Initiative Bayer Big Data in a Box BioConnect Iowa Bloomfield Robotics Cornell AgriTech and Agricultural Experiment Station Corteva Agriscience CSIRO, Australia CyVerse Dryland Genetics EarthSense, Inc. EnGenious Ag ETALYC, Inc. Federal Statistical Research Data Center at Iowa State University Genomes to Fields Initiative Grow Pittsburgh International Plant Phenotyping Network Germany Iowa Corn Growers Association Iowa Economic Development Authority Iowa Fruit and Vegetable Growers Assn. John Deere Microsoft Midwest Big Data Hub Mineral Google, X, The Moonshot Factory N. American Plant Phenotyping Network NSF Transdisciplinary Research In Principles Of Data Science TRIPODS Institute at University of Arizona Oak Ridge National Laboratory Omni Analytics Group NSF USDA NIFA AI Institutes AIFS, AI FARMS Practical Farmers of Iowa Raven Applied Technology RocketML, Inc. The Data and Software Carpentries The University of Tokyo Japan University of Nebraska Lincoln, Center for Resilience in Agricultural Working Landscapes and NSF National Research Traineeship USDA Agricultural Research Service Vermeer Corp. More Information AI Institute for Agricultural AI for Transforming Workforce and Decision Support AgAID USDA NIFA 2021 Focus Integrate AI methods into agriculture operations for prediction, decision support, and robotics enabled agriculture to address complex agricultural challenges. This Institute uses a unique adopt adapt amplify approach to develop and deliver AI solutions to agriculture that address pressing challenges related to labor, water, weather and climate change. AgAID involves farmers, workers, managers and policymakers in development of these solutions as well as AI  5. Overview of the National Artificial Intelligence Research Institutes NITRD and NAIIO Supplement to the President s FY2022 Budget 69 training and education, which promotes equity by increasing the technological skill levels of the next generation agricultural workforce. Funding 20 million total over five years. Primary Organization Washington State University Other Principal Organizations Carnegie Mellon University Heritage University IBM Research Innov8 Ag Oregon State University University of California University of Virginia Wenatchee Valley College Partners Collaborators AgTech Insight Allan Brothers Almond Board of California CA Department of Water Resources Cascadia Innovation Corridor Canada Central Valley Community Foundation Chemeketa, OR, Community College Columbia Basin College Environmental Defense Fund G. S. Long Grassland, CA, Irrigation District Leibniz Institute for Agricultural Engineering Bioeconomy Germany Linn Benton Community College Merced College Merced Irrigation District Mercer Ranches Microsoft Okanogan Irrigation District Turlock, CA, Irrigation District University of British Columbia Canada University of Technology Sydney Australia Valencia Polytechnic University Spain Verdant Robotics Walla Walla County, CA, Conservation District Washington Department of Ecology Washington Mint Commission Washington Tree Fruit Commission Washington Wine Grape Commission Wilbur Ellis Wonderful Orchards Yakama Nation Tribal School Zirkle Fruit Company More Information Theme AI for Accelerating Molecular Synthesis and Manufacturing AI Institute for Molecular Discovery, Synthetic Strategy, and Manufacturing also known as Molecule Maker Lab NSF 2020 Focus Develop new AI enabled tools to accelerate automated chemical synthesis and advance the discovery and manufacture of novel materials and bioactive compounds. The institute also serves as a training ground for the next generation of scientists with combined expertise in AI, chemistry, and bioengineering. Funding 20 million total over five years Primary Organization University of Illinois at Urbana Champaign Other Principal Organizations Pennsylvania State University Rochester Institute of Technology Partners Collaborators Northwestern University Allchemy, Inc. More Information  5. Overview of the National Artificial Intelligence Research Institutes 70 NITRD and NAIIO Supplement to the President s FY2022 Budget Theme AI for Discovery in Physics AI Institute for Artificial Intelligence and Fundamental Interactions NSF 2020 Focus Incorporate workforce development, digital learning, outreach, and knowledge transfer programs to develop AI methods that integrate the laws of physics as a guiding framework to advance physics knowledge from the smallest building blocks of nature to the largest structures in the universe and galvanize AI research innovation to broaden societal impacts. Funding 20 million total over five years Primary Organization Massachusetts Institute of Technology MIT Other Principal Organizations Harvard University Northeastern University Tufts University Partners Collaborators Amazon Argonne National Laboratory CERN Switzerland DeepMind UK Fermilab IBM Jefferson Laboratory LIGO Scientific Collaboration Microsoft Research MIT Bates Computing Center MIT IBM Watson AI Lab Nvidia Salesforce Sony Japan X, The Moonshot Factory Xilinx Yandex Russia More Information Theme AI in Dynamic Systems AI Institute for Dynamic Systems DHS, NSF 2021 Focus Enable innovative research and education in fundamental AI and machine learning theory, algorithms and applications specifically for safe, real time learning and control of complex dynamic systems. The core motivation for this institute is to integrate physics based models with AI and machine learning approaches, leading the way towards data enabled ethical, efficient, and explainable solutions for real time sensing, prediction, and decision making challenges across science and engineering. Funding 20 million total over five years. Primary Organization University of Washington Other Principal Organizations Boise State University Columbia University Harvard University Montana State University Portland State University Seattle University University of Alaska University of Hawaii University of Nevada Partners Collaborators Boeing Advanced Research Center Pacific Northwest National Laboratories More Information  5. Overview of the National Artificial Intelligence Research Institutes NITRD and NAIIO Supplement to the President s FY2022 Budget 71 Theme Foundations of Machine Learning AI Institute for Foundations of Machine Learning NSF 2020 Focus Address major theoretical challenges in AI, including next generation algorithms for deep learning, neural architecture optimization, and efficient robust statistics. Major online coursework and research initiatives will bring current AI tools to thousands of students and professionals across the country. The Dell Medical School at University of Texas at Austin will test algorithms developed in the Institute to expedite turnaround time for medical imaging diagnostics. Several major businesses have signed on to transfer Institute research into practice. Funding 20 million total over five years Primary Organization University of Texas at Austin Other Principal Organizations Microsoft Research University of Washington Wichita State University Partners Collaborators City of Austin Dell Technologies Facebook Internet Archive Netflix Texas Advanced Computing Center University of Texas at Austin Dell Medical School YouTube More Information Theme Human AI Interaction and Collaboration AI Institute for Collaborative Assistance and Responsive Interaction for Networked Groups AI CARING NSF, Industry Partners 2021 Focus Seek to create a vibrant, fully developed discipline focused on personalized, longitudinal over months and years collaborative AI systems that learn individual models of human behavior and how they change over time and use that knowledge to better collaborate and communicate in caregiving environments. The collaborative AI Partners in Care developed as part of this Institute will help support a growing population of older adults to sustain independence, improve quality of life, and increase effectiveness of care coordination across the care network. Funding 20 million total over five years, including partial funding from Amazon and Google. Primary Organization Georgia Institute of Technology Other Principal Organizations Carnegie Mellon University Oregon Health and Science University Oregon State University University of Massachusetts Lowell Partners Collaborators Achieva American Association of Retired Persons Apple Briarcliff Oaks Cathedral Towers, Inc. Chatham University Emory University Facebook Hello Robot Jewish Healthcare Foundation Morehouse School of Medicine NASA, TX, and Jet Propulsion Laboratory, CA  5. Overview of the National Artificial Intelligence Research Institutes 72 NITRD and NAIIO Supplement to the President s FY2022 Budget National Center for Women and IT National Church Residences, Trinity Towers NIST Northern Essex Community College Nvidia Oak Ridge National Laboratory People Power Pittsburgh Healthcare System Sandia National Laboratories St. Anne s Terrace, Inc. Stanley Healthcare Toyota Research Institute, CA University of Pittsburgh UPMC Enterprises VA More Information Theme Trustworthy AI AI Institute for Research on Trustworthy AI in Weather, Climate, and Coastal Oceanography also known as AI Institute for Artificial Intelligence for Environmental Sciences, or AI2ES NSF 2021 Focus Assemble researchers in AI, atmospheric and ocean science, and risk communication to develop user driven trustworthy AI that addresses pressing concerns in weather, climate, and coastal oceanography and coastal hazards prediction. With AI certificate programs aimed at workforce skills, the institute is providing the research and training necessary for the future workforce to deliver the advances needed to deal with forecasting and prediction challenges. Funding 20 million total over five years Primary Organization University of Oklahoma, Norman Campus Other Principal Organizations Colorado State University Del Mar College National Center for Atmospheric Research University Corporation for Atmospheric Research North Carolina State University Texas A M University Corpus Christi University at Albany, SUNY University of Washington Partners Collaborators City of Corpus Christi DHS Disaster Technologies. Inc. DOT Department of Environmental Conservation Google IBM The Weather Company Joint Typhoon Warning Center National Hurricane Center National Park Service NOAA National Severe Storms Lab Storm Prediction Center, Earth System Research Labs Global Systems Lab, National Geodetic Survey, Operational Oceanographic Products Services, and Cooperative Institute for Environmental Services Global Systems Lab Nueces County, TX, Coastal Parks Nvidia NY Independent Systems Operator NY Power Authority NY Thruway Oklahoma Climate Survey Texas Coastal Offices of the National Weather Service Texas Commission on Environmental Quality Texas DOT Texas General Land Office More Information  5. Overview of the National Artificial Intelligence Research Institutes NITRD and NAIIO Supplement to the President s FY2022 Budget 73 Other AI Institutes In addition to the 18 National AI Research Institutes described above that are directly affiliated with and overseen by the National Science Foundation, there are two other AI Institutes in operation in the Nation that have been established by other Federal agencies that meet the overall criteria established by the National Artificial Intelligence Initiative Act of 2020. These AI Institutes are described briefly below. DAF AI Institute DAF MIT AI Accelerator 2020 The goal of the DAF MIT AI Accelerator is to create a state of the art, end to end, sustainable pipeline for AI technology to give the U.S. Air Force, U.S. Space Force, and the United States broadly a competitive advantage in the defense and civilian sectors by conducting fundamental research to enable rapid prototyping, scaling, and the ethical application of AI algorithms and systems. This work, including ten 3 year projects, makes eligible Air Force datasets publicly accessible as an important aspect of researching and developing new AI systems. The projects advance AI research in areas such as weather modeling and visualization, optimization of training schedules, rapid disaster response, narrower projects such as multimodal vision for synthetic aperture radar, and enhancing autonomy for augmenting and amplifying human decision making. The AI Accelerator leverages universities, small businesses, and traditional defense and nontraditional commercial ventures collaborating with the Air Force and Space Force in multidisciplinary teams to develop and ensure the ethical use of advanced AI technologies that can be rapidly adopted by DOD and the Nation to address important societal needs. More Information VA National AI Institute with an R D Focus on Veterans 2020 The goal of the Veterans Affairs National AI Institute is to develop AI research and development capabilities in the VA to support Veterans, their families, survivors, and caregivers. The Institute designs and collaborates on large scale AI R D initiatives, national AI policy, and partnerships across agencies, industries, and academia. Current work includes pilot projects to demonstrate size, scope, and magnitude of capabilities that deliver positive real world outcomes for Veterans. These flagship projects, which are designed with Veteran input, will utilize VA data and emphasize particular AI areas such as deep learning, explainable AI, privacy preserving AI, and AI for multiscale time series. As the VA s capacity and portfolio of AI research increases, the VA plans to create a pipeline for AI research to transition to validation, user acceptance, and eventually enterprise implementation. More Information   74 NITRD and NAIIO Supplement to the President s FY2022 Budget ABBREVIATIONS 3GPP 3rd Generation Partnership Project of standards organizations that develop mobile telecom protocols 5G 5th generation cellular wireless technology ACL HHS Administration for Community Living ACN Advanced Communications Networks ADAS Assured Development and Operation of Autonomous Systems project OUSD R E AFOSR Air Force Office of Scientific Research DOD AFRI Agriculture and Food Research Initiative USDA AFRL Air Force Research Laboratory DOD AHRQ Agency for Healthcare Research and Quality HHS AI artificial intelligence and NITRD PCA and IWG AI ML AI and machine learning AIM AHEAD AI ML Consortium to Advance Health Equity and Researcher Diversity NIH ANSI American National Standards Institute ARL Army Research Laboratory DOD ARS Agricultural Research Service USDA ASTM Developer of voluntary consensus standards AWN Advanced wireless networks AWRD Advanced wireless R D NITRD sub PCA BD Big Data NITRD IWG BLS U.S. Bureau of Labor Statistics DOL BRD Broadband R D LSN subgroup C5ISR Command, Control, Communications, Computers, Cyber, Intelligence, Surveillance and Reconnaissance Center DOD Army C5ISR S TCD C5ISR Space Terrestrial Communi cations Directorate DOD Army CCDC Combat Capabilities Development Command DOD Army CDC Centers for Disease Control and Prevention HHS CDS Clinical decision support Census U.S. Census Bureau DOC CG Coast Guard DHS CHuman Computing Enabled Human Interaction, Communication Augmentation NITRD PCA CMS Centers for Medicare and Medicaid Services HHS CNPS Computing enabled Networked Physical Systems NITRD PCA COVID 19 novel coronavirus disease strain that caused the global pandemic that began in 2020 CPS cyber physical systems CSIA Cybersecurity and Information Assurance NITRD IWG CSP Cyber Security and Privacy NITRD PCA DAF U.S. Department of the Air Force USAF and USSF combined DARPA Defense Advanced Research Projects Agency DOD DEA Drug Enforcement Administration DHA Defense Health Agency DOD DHS Department of Homeland Security DHS CISA DHS Cybersecurity and Infrastructure Security Agency DHS CWMD DHS Countering Weapons of Mass Destruction Office DHS S T DHS Science and Technology Directorate DHS TSA DHS Transportation Security Administration DL deep learning DOC Department of Commerce DOD Department of Defense DOE Department of Energy DOE AITO DOE Artificial Intelligence and Technology Office DOE ARPA E DOE Advanced Research Projects Agency Energy DOE CESER DOE Office of Cybersecurity, Energy Security, and Emergency Response DOE EERE DOE Office of Energy Efficiency and Renewable Energy DOE FE DOE Office of Fossil Energy DOE NE DOE Office of Nuclear Energy DOE NNSA DOE National Nuclear Security Administration DOE OE DOE Office of Electricity DOE SC DOE Office of Science DOI Department of the Interior DOI BSEE DOI Bureau of Safety and Environmental Enforcement DOI USBR DOI U.S. Bureau of Reclamation DOJ Department of Justice DOL Department of Labor  Abbreviations NITRD and NAIIO Supplement to the President s FY2022 Budget 75 DOT Department of Transportation DREN Defense Research and Engineering Network DOD DTE Digital Twin Earth DTRA Defense Threat Reduction Agency DOD ECP Exascale Computing Project EdW Education and Workforce NITRD PCA EHCS Enabling R D for High Capability Computing Systems NITRD PCA EHR electronic health record ENIT Electronics for Networking and Information Technology NITRD PCA EPA Environmental Protection Agency FAA Federal Aviation Administration DOT FACE Future Advanced Computing Ecosystem NSTC Subcommittee and Strategic Plan FAIR findable, accessible, interoperable, and reusable FBI Federal Bureau of Investigation DOJ FCC Federal Communications Commission FCEN Financial Crimes Enforcement Network Treasury FDA Food and Drug Administration HHS FHIR Fast Healthcare Interoperability Resources FHWA Federal Highway Administration DOT FMCSA Federal Motor Carrier Safety Administration DOT FRA Federal Railroad Administration DOT FTA Federal Transit Administration DOT FTC Federal Trade Commission FW HTF Future of Work at the Human Technology Frontier NSF FY fiscal year GOES R Geostationary Operational Environmental Satellite R Series GSA General Services Administration HBCUs Historically Black Colleges Universities HCC high capability computing HCI human computer interaction HCIA High Capability Computing Infra structure and Applications NITRD PCA HEC High End Computing term NITRD IWG HHS Department of Health Human Services HITRD Health Information Technology R D NITRD IWG HIV human immunodeficiency virus HPC high performance computing HPCMP High Performance Computing Modernization Program DOD Army HRSA Health Resources and Services Administration HHS IARPA Intelligence Advanced Research Projects Activity ODNI IEEE Institute of Electrical and Electronics Engineers esp. IEEE Standards Assn. IETF Internet Engineering Task Force standards organization IHS Indian Health Service HHS IoT Internet of Things IotF Industries of the Future IRAS Intelligent Robotics and Autonomous Systems NITRD PCA and IWG ISO International Organization for Standardization IT information technology ITA International Trade Administration DOC ITS intelligent transportation systems ITS JPO Intelligent Transportation Systems Joint Program Office DOT IWG Interagency Working Group JAIC Joint Artificial Intelligence Center DOD JET Joint Engineering Team LSN IWG JROTC Junior Reserve Officers Training Corps LSDMA Large Scale Data Management and Analysis NITRD PCA LSN Large Scale Networking NITRD PCA, IWG MAGIC Middleware and Grid Interagency Coordination team of the LSN IWG MARAD Maritime Administration DOT MDA Missile Defense Agency DOD MIMO multiple input multiple output MIT Massachusetts Institute of Technology ML machine learning NAII National AI Institute VA NAIIO National Artificial Intelligence Initiative Office OSTP NARA National Archives and Records Administration NASA National Aeronautics and Space Administration NASA Aero NASA Aeronautics Research Mission Directorate NASA Science NASA Science Mission Directorate NCHS National Center for Health Statistics HHS NCI National Cancer Institute NIH NCO NITRD s National Coordination Office Next G Next generation NHTSA National Highway Traffic Safety Administration DOT  Abbreviations 76 NITRD and NAIIO Supplement to the President s FY2022 Budget NICE National Initiative for Cybersecurity Education NIST NIFA National Institute of Food and Agriculture USDA NIH National Institutes of Health HHS NIJ National Institute of Justice DOJ NIOSH National Institute for Occupational Safety and Health HHS CDC NIST National Institute of Standards and Technology DOC NITRD Networking and Information Technology Research and Development Program and NSTC Subcommittee NMIO National Maritime Intelligence Integration Office DOD NOAA National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration DOC NOAA ORF NOAA Operations, Research, Facilities NOAA PAC NOAA Procurement, Acquisition, Construction NRC Nuclear Regulatory Commission NREL National Renewable Energy Laboratory DOE NRI 3.0 National Robotics Initiative 3.0 Innovations in Integration of Robotics, 3rd generation NRL Naval Research Laboratory DOD NRO National Reconnaissance Office NSA National Security Agency DOD NSF National Science Foundation NSTC National Science and Technology Council NTIA National Telecommunications and Information Administration DOC NTSB National Transportation Safety Board ODNI Office, Director of National Intelligence OMB Office of Management and Budget ONC Office of the National Coordinator for Health Information Technology HHS ONR Office of Naval Research DOD OSD Office of the Secretary of Defense OSHA Occupational Safety and Health Administration DOL OSTP White House Office of Science and Technology Policy OUSD R E Office of the Undersecretary of Defense for Research and Engineering PCA Program Component Area PCAST President s Council of Advisors on Science and Technology PHMSA Pipeline and Hazardous Materials Safety Administration DOT PI principal investigator QIS quantum information systems R D research and development RADx Rapid Acceleration of Diagnostics NIH RF radio frequency ROK ADD Republic of Korea Agency for Defense Development S E science and engineering S T science and technology SAMHSA Substance Abuse and Mental Health Services Administration HHS SBIR STTR U.S. Small Business Innovation Research and Technology Transfer programs SCC Smart Cities and Communities SPSQ Software Productivity, Sustainability, and Quality NITRD PCA and IWG SSA Social Security Administration State Department of State STEM science, technology, engineering, and mathematics STRIDES Science and Technology Research Infrastructure for Discovery, Experi mentation, and Sustainability NIH STRIDES Supporting Teachers in Responsive Instruction for Developing Expertise in Science NSF TCSC Republic of Korea U.S. Defense pact Technology Cooperation Subcommittee Treas ury Department of the Treasury TRMC DOD Test Resource Management Center UC University of California UK United Kingdom Britain USACE U.S. Army Corps of Engineers USAF U.S. Air Force part of DAF USAMRDC U.S. Army Medical Research and Development Command DOD USCYBERCOM U.S. Cyber Command DOD USDA U.S. Department of Agriculture USGS U.S. Geological Survey DOI USPTO U.S. Patent and Trademark Office DOC USSF U.S. Space Force part of DAF VA Department of Veterans Affairs VIA Video and Image Analytics NITRD AI IWG task force WSRD Wireless Spectrum Research Development NITRD IWG XSEDE Extreme Science and Engineering Discovery Environment NSF   This page intentionally left blank.   NATIONAL SCIENCE AND TECHNOLOGY COUNCIL COMMITTEE ON SCIENCE AND TECHNOLOGY ENTERPRISE SUBCOMMITTEE ON NETWORKING AND INFORMATION TECHNOLOGY RESEARCH AND DEVELOPMENT SELECT COMMITTEE ON ARTIFICIAL INTELLIGENCE MACHINE LEARNING AND ARTIFICIAL INTELLIGENCE SUBCOMMITTEE NATIONAL ARTIFICIAL INTELLIGENCE INITIATIVE OFFICE 