 Guidance document Pattern approval of point of sales systems February 2020 NMI on the internet   Contents About this guide 1 Background 1 Definition 1 Frequently asked questions 2 1. What is a simple printer or indicator 2 2. What do I need to do if I have a simple printer or indicator 2 3. What is and is not a POS system 2 4. What do I need to do if I have a POS system 2 5. What about instruments that are currently installed 3 6. Does every POS system need to be assessed by NMI 3 7. Can I change the hardware in my POS system 3 8. Can I change the software in my POS system without requiring re approval 3 9. Can a POS system replace the primary indicator on the connected instrument 3 10. I am a software developer Can I get approval for just POS software 4 11. How long will the assessment of a POS system take 4 12. How much will it cost 4 13. Are the NMI M 7 requirements only applicable to retail weighing POS systems 4 Appendix 1 POS verification requirements before and after 1 August 2012. 5   Guidance document Pattern approval of POS systems V2.0 Page 1 About this guide Point of sale POS systems used in connection with a measuring instrument to buy or sell goods or services referred to as in use for trade must be pattern approved by the National Measurement Institute NMI and verified by a servicing licensee. This guide helps suppliers and verifiers understand the pattern approval and verification process for these systems. It includes information about historical systems and requirements. See our website for an overview of point of sale systems and requirements. Background In 1983, the National Standards Commission now the NMI introduced a general supplementary certificate of approval S1 0 for auxiliary indicating devices. S1 0 specified requirements for auxiliary printing and indicating devices that connected to a measuring instrument in use for trade. These devices duplicated the measurement data displayed by the measuring instrument and were used to calculate price. They included ticket and label printers, point of sale POS systems, secondary indicators and summing indicators. In 1992, an update to this certificate of approval was re issued as S1 0 A. When these certificates were released, POS systems were primarily a single simple cash register, connected to a weighing instrument, which performed basic price computation functions. During the 1990 s POS systems evolved to include additional functionality, including management and stock control functions, and became software based systems consisting of a processor, visual display unit VDU and printer. In 2011, following a review of S1 0 A and a period of consultation, the National Measurement Institute NMI introduced a new scheme for the pattern approval of point of sale systems. On 1 August 2012, S1 0 A was replaced by General Supplementary Certificate of Approval No S1 0B, for the approval of simple printers and indicators, and document NMI M 7 Pattern Approval Specifications for Point of Sale Systems, for the approval of POS systems. Simple printers and indicators including summing indicators are required to be compliant with S1 0B, but are not required to be pattern approved by NMI. They may be self assessed by the manufacturer supplier for compliance with S1 0B, and checked for correct function when they are connected to a verified measuring instrument. Since 1 August 2012, newly installed or modified POS systems are required to be compliant with NMI M 7 and pattern approved. Following successful evaluation, a supplementary certificate of approval and unique approval number in the form NMI S will be issued by NMI for the POS system. Definition A POS system is defined as a component of a measuring instrument that is approved for use for trade used for creating labels, receipts or documents able to convert the result of a measurement made by the measuring instrument not able to control the measuring instrument or affect its metrological performance. Convert the result of the measurement means that it performs some calculation on the measurement such as price computation or subtraction of stored tare etc. POS systems are required to be verified prior to being used for trade. Further information on this can be found on our Servicing licensee pages.   Guidance document Pattern approval of POS systems V2.0 Page 2 Frequently asked questions 1. What is a simple printer or indicator A simple printer or indicator is a simple electronic device that indicates or prints, and is interfaced to a measuring instrument approved for use in trade, to duplicate but not calculate price, unit price and or measurement data. 2. What do I need to do if I have a simple printer or indicator Simple printers and indicators need to meet the requirements in the General Certificate of Approval S1 0B. Devices purporting to comply with this approval shall be marked in a clear and permanent manner, in one easily accessible location on the main body of the device, with the manufacturer s or importer s name or mark a serial number or other unique identifier the NMI approval number NMI S1 0B. The instrument does not need to be submitted to NMI for pattern approval. 3. What is and is not a POS system A POS system is a component of a measuring instrument approved for use for trade, which typically creates labels, or transaction records. It is capable of converting the result of a measurement on the measuring instrument but not capable of controlling it, or affecting its metrological operation. These are systems that connect to approved measuring instruments and do more than just replicate the measurement data. They may perform functions such as price computation based on measurement data, or subtraction of a tare value. Such systems typically consist of a controller, display and associated control software. They are external to the measuring instrument but are connected to it digitally. Auxiliary devices or systems that have the following functions are not POS systems and should be submitted to NMI for pattern approval against the relevant requirements document e.g. NMI R 76, NMI R 117, etc. . This includes devices that can do any of the following Control a function of the measuring instrument s. Modify the indication of the measured quantity on the measuring instrument primary indicator. Store calibration or other measurement related data for use by the measuring instrument. Control self service arrangements for fuel dispensers. 4. What do I need to do if I have a POS system POS systems need to meet the requirements of NMI M 7 and be assessed by NMI for compliance against these requirements where, on satisfactory evaluation, a supplementary certificate of approval will be issued. Read more about the pattern approval process. Once a certificate of approval has been issued, the POS system must be verified before being used for trade. Further information can be found in the table of POS verification requirements in Appendix 1   Guidance document Pattern approval of POS systems V2.0 Page 3 5. What about instruments that are currently installed Any system that is compliant with S1 0 A, and was installed prior to 1 August 2012, may continue to be used for trade for as long as the system remains unchanged. If changes are made to the system, it must be assessed against the relevant pattern approval document, i.e. NMI M 7. NMI M 7 approval is required if there are changes to the method of price computation or manipulation of the measurement data changes to the software controlling the ticket or label formatting other software changes that relate to the measurement operation hardware changes such as replacement of processor, display, printer etc., unless the replacement is the same or equivalent type. Changes to pricing data, product look up tables PLU tables or similar do not require NMI M 7 approval, provided none of the changes described above are required. 6. Does every POS system need to be assessed by NMI No the certificate of approval will be for a family of POS systems. A family of devices will cover a single model or series of models, or single software version or series of software versions, provided they are not substantially different in their operation. 7. Can I change the hardware in my POS system The hardware can be changed within the scope of the certificate of approval. For example, the replacement of a printer with an equivalent printer would be allowed, but addition of a printer to a system that was not approved with one, would not be. Where equivalent components are permitted in the certificate of approval, the changed components must ensure the system maintains compliance with the requirements of NMI M 7. For example, if the model of customer display is changed to a version that is smaller in size, the new model must still comply with character height requirements, and not cut off or truncate any of the required information. 8. Can I change the software in my POS system without requiring re approval NMI M 7 allows the POS software to be split into legally relevant and not legally relevant . If the software has been split in this way, the changes to the not legally relevant portion are allowed as described in the certificate of approval. For example, drivers would not be documented in the certificate of approval and could therefore be changed. 9. Can a POS system replace the primary indicator on the connected instrument No, the POS system is an addition to a measuring instrument. Any changes to the measuring instrument would require an amendment to the certificate of approval for that instrument. The measuring instrument s primary indicator should still be accessible for verification purposes.   Guidance document Pattern approval of POS systems V2.0 Page 4 10. I am a software developer Can I get approval for just POS software No. A POS system consists of both hardware and software, which have to be assessed together to determine compliance with NMI M 7. Submittors of POS systems must ensure hardware components and software configurations are correct before authorising the marking of the certificate of approval number on a POS system to be verified for trade use. 11. How long will the assessment of a POS system take Time scales depend on the workload of the Pattern Approval Laboratory and the complexity of the system, but typically allow 8 12 weeks. The Pattern Approval Unit can provide more accurate time scales at the time of application. 12. How much will it cost Costs depend on the complexity of the system, but estimated costs for a typical POS system can be found on the Pattern approval page. 13. Are the NMI M 7 requirements only applicable to retail weighing POS systems No these requirements are applicable to all systems that meet the definition of POS, including those connected to weighbridges. QUESTIONS Any questions or comments can be sent to Email patternapproval measurement.gov.au Or call 1300 686 664   Guidance document Pattern approval of POS systems V2.0 Page 5 Appendix 1 POS verification requirements before and after 1 August 2012. POS systems installed before 1 August 2012 POS systems installed after 1 August 2012 Simple printers and indicator installed before 1 Aug 2012 Simple printers and indicators installed after 1 August 2012 Measuring instrument attached to a POS system Certificate of Approval General Supplementary Certificate S1 0 A POS system s supplementary certificate of approval SXXX General Supplementary Certificate S1 0 A General Supplementary Certificate S1 0 B Instrument s certificate of approval e.g. NMI 6 4C XXX Compliance marking requirement data plate Attached to the controller of each POS system by anyone authorised by the submitter or by the verifier of the measuring instrument to which the POS is attached. Location of the data plate will be detailed in the certificate of approval but will normally be on the POS controller. The data plate can be attached by anyone authorised by the submitter. Attached to each device in a visible location by anyone authorised by the submitter. Attached to each device in a visible location by anyone authorised by the submitter. Devices which form part of a POS system do not need to be labelled with S1 0B. Location of the data plate will be detailed in the certificate of approval and can be attached by anyone authorised by the submitter. Licence class required for verification. Servicing licence with the subclass of the measuring instrument to which the POS is attached i.e. 6.1, 6.2, 6.3, 6.4, 5.1, 10.1 etc . These POS systems should be verified under a servicing licence with subclass 18.2. Servicing licence with the subclass of the measuring instrument to which the printer or indicator is attached i.e. 6.1, 6.2, 6.3, 6.4, 5.1, 10.1 etc . Servicing licence with the subclass of the measuring instrument to which the printer or indicator is attached i.e. 6.1, 6.2, 6.3, 6.4, 5.1, 10.1 etc . Measuring instruments are to be verified under a servicing licence with the relevant subclass e.g. 6.1, 6.2, 6.3, 6.4, 5.1 or 10.1 . Verification test procedures As described in the National Instrument test Procedures NITP for the measuring instrument to which the POS is connected. As described in the certificate of approval for the POS system. As described in the NITP for the measuring instrument to which the printer or indicator is connected. As described in the NITP for the measuring instrument to which the printer or indicator is connected. NITP relevant to the measuring instrument Verification marking requirements None on the POS. A single verification mark is applied to the weighing instrument when it is verified. The label bearing a verifier s mark should be applied to the POS controller in a position that is easily found by a trade measurement inspector. None on the printer or indicator. A single verification mark is applied to the weighing instrument when it is verified. None on the printer or indicator. A single verification mark is applied to the weighing instrument when it is verified. The label bearing a verifier s mark should be applied to the measuring instrument in a position that is easily found by a trade measurement inspector. Sealing requirements None required. Described in certificate of approval generally none required. None required. None required. Described in certificate of approval. Manufacturer s mark or name Serial number NMI Approval number S1 0 A Submitters name or mark Serial number NMI Approval number SXXX Manufacturer s mark or name Serial number NMI Approval number S1 0 A Manufacturer s mark or name Serial number NMI Approval number S1 0B Manufacturer s mark, or name written in full Indication of accuracy class Pattern approval number for the instrument Maximum capacity Minimum capacity Verification scale interval e Maximum subtractive tare T Serial number of the instrument 