 Australian Jobs Act 2013 User Guide for SmartForm Compliance Reports August 2021 This user guide is for project proponents and facility operators preparing their SmartForm Compliance Reports under the Australian Jobs Act 2013 Jobs Act I want to Get a quick overview of the Jobs Act compliance report p.2 Understand the compliance report submission process p.3 Navigate through the SmartForm compliance report p.8 Find out how to answer each question in the report p.14 Get an answer to my query about compliance reports p.20 Preview the SmartForm Jobs Act compliance report p.22 Important note this User Guide does not apply to Commonwealth procurements or Commonwealth funded projects under 500 million.  2 User Guide for Jobs Act SmartForm Compliance Reports v.1 August 2021 Overview of Compliance Reports Compliance reports describe how proponents and operators of eligible major projects 500 million and above have implemented their approved Australian Industry Participation AIP plan to give full, fair and reasonable opportunity to Australian entities to bid for the supply of key goods and services 1 million and more for the project or new facility. AIP plans are specific to each major project and apply to the design, procurement and construction phase of the project. If the project establishes a new facility, the AIP plan also applies to the procurement for the operational phase of the new facility and the first two years of operations. AIP plans do not mandate the award of contracts to Australian entities defined as an entity with an ABN or ACN but do require proponents and operators to give equal consideration to capable Australian suppliers alongside any existing suppliers they may have. It is a requirement of the Jobs Act that for as long as the approved AIP plan is in force, the project proponents must comply with Part B of the AIP plan and facility operators must comply with Part C of the AIP plan. The SmartForm Compliance Reports have been developed in accordance with the Australian Jobs Australian Industry Participation Rule 2014 and must be used to complete the compliance reports for SmartForm AIP plans. The nominated project proponent completes the Project Compliance Reports and the nominated facility operator completes the Operations Compliance Reports. Australian Industry Participation Authority The Australian Industry Participation Authority AIP Authority is responsible for ensuring project proponents and facility operators comply with the requirement to effectively implement their AIP plans. The AIP Authority will assess compliance reports to ensure they meet the required standard. There are penalties the AIP Authority may impose on proponents and operators for non compliance with the Jobs Act, including non compliance with their approved AIP plan. SmartForm Compliance Reports The SmartForm Compliance Reports allow proponents and operators to develop and submit their compliance reports online. They have a number of features that make it easier to complete the reports. The actions from Parts B and C of the approved AIP plan will be pre populated with response boxes to describe how they have been implemented. Evidence of implementation actions can be uploaded to the report. Changes to proponent, operator, project and contact details in the approved AIP plan can be made in the compliance reports. Compliance reports should be completed by one person within the proponent or operator but can be sent to other staff for review and approval. Proponents and operators can also print a copy of the reports for distribution at any stage.  3 User Guide for Jobs Act SmartForm Compliance Reports v.1 August 2021 Compliance report submission The nominated project proponent must submit a Compliance Report for each six month period or part thereof commencing on the day that the AIP plan is approved until the project is completed. The date by which a Compliance Report must be given to the AIP Authority is within three months after the end of each six month reporting period. The table below illustrates this for a project where the AIP plan was approved on 10 January 2019 and the project was completed on 30 May 2020 AIP plan approved Start first reporting period End first reporting period First report due 10 January 2019 10 January 2019 9 July 2019 9 October 2019 Start second reporting period End second reporting period Second report due 10 July 2019 9 January 2020 9 April 2020 Project completed Start third reporting period End third reporting period Third report due 30 May 2020 10 January 2020 30 May 2020 30 August 2020 The AIP Authority may, by written notice to the project proponent, determine a longer or shorter reporting period for a project. This may apply when a project is experiencing significant delays that affect the implementation of AIP plan activities. Project proponents may contact the AIP Authority if this occurs to extend the reporting period. Project proponents should not wait until the end of a reporting period to contact the AIP Authority. Where a project will establish a new eligible facility, the nominated facility operator must submit a Compliance Report for each six month period commencing on the day procurement activity for the initial operations of the facility commences. The date by which a Compliance Report must be given to the AIP Authority is within three months after the end of each six month reporting period. A facility operator must continue to provide Compliance Reports up to and during the two year initial operational period in which an AIP plan remains in force. Compliance reporting is not required after the expiry of the two year period. The table below illustrates this where the AIP plan for the project was approved on 10 January 2019, operations procurement activity started on 1 January 2020 and the new facility commenced operations on 1 June 2020 Operations procurement activity starts Start first operations reporting period End first operations reporting period First operations report due 1 January 2020 1 January 2020 30 June 2020 30 September 2020  4 User Guide for Jobs Act SmartForm Compliance Reports v.1 August 2021 New facility commences operations Start second operations reporting period End second reporting period Second report due 1 June 2020 1 July 2020 31 December 2020 31 March 2021 Start third operations reporting period End third reporting period Third report due 1 January 2021 30 June 2021 30 September 2021 Start fourth operations reporting period End fourth reporting period Fourth report due 1 July 2021 31 December 2021 31 March 2022 Start fifth operations reporting period End fifth reporting period Fifth report due 1 January 2022 30 May 2022 30 August 2022 Two years after facility commenced operations As project proponents and facility operators report separately there may be an overlapping period when project phase and operations phase compliance reports are both required. Completing the compliance reports The Project Compliance Reports should be completed and submitted by the nominated proponent for the project. The Operations Compliance Reports should be completed and submitted by the nominated facility operator. The nominated project proponent s contact person must complete the Project Compliance Report by opening the link to the SmartForm report in the AIP Authority s approval email for the AIP plan. The nominated facility operator s contact person must complete the Operations Compliance Report by opening the link to the report in the AIP Authority s approval email for the AIP plan. Ensure the correct link is used. If a proponent or operator has multiple AIP plans ensure the correct project approval email is used. If the links are not able to be found contact the AIP Authority. Do not use the paper based compliance report templates as they do not match the SmartForm AIP plan. Only use the AIP plan approval email links for the first Project Compliance Report and the first Operations Compliance Report. Subsequent reports must be completed using the links from the most recent compliance report acceptance email from the AIP Authority. If an approved AIP plan is replaced with a new AIP plan, use the links from the replacement AIP plan approval email for the next compliance reports. The contact person should read all information and each question, select from the available options and provide more information where indicated. All required questions must be answered and the use of TBA or TBC is not acceptable. Provide evidence of implementation actions where indicated. If a required question has not been answered the SmartForm will prompt an answer before the report can be completed. The report should be saved regularly during completion. Refer to the SmartForm Compliance Reports Navigation section for more information on SmartForm features.  5 User Guide for Jobs Act SmartForm Compliance Reports v.1 August 2021 The compliance reports describe the actions that the project proponent or operator have taken to ensure that their procurement entities also provide Australian entities with full, fair and reasonable opportunity to participate in the project. Procurement entities are those entities responsible for acquiring key goods and services 1 million and above for the project or facility. They include entities engaged by the project proponent or facility operator to provide engineering, procurement and construction management EPC M services or tier one contractors for the project or facility. Where a project proponent and or operator is also a procurement entity for the project or facility, the actions relating to procurement entities in the AIP plan also apply to the proponent or operator. At any stage of completion, the report can be sent to another internal person for review and or approval. This is optional and the AIP Authority does not require reports to be sent for internal review. Note that any person with access to the link will be able to open the report and make changes to it. It is recommended therefore that only the contact person should complete and update the report using feedback from others. Reviewers can enter feedback comments against each response by clicking on the comments icons. These comments will then be visible to the contact person when the report is returned to them. Proponents and operators can also print a PDF copy of the report for distribution. Note that if you do not access and save your report within 60 calendar days of your last save, it will expire and the report will be deleted. You will not be able to retrieve it and will need to start a new report. Submitting compliance reports Project proponents and facility operators must submit each compliance report to the AIP Authority within three months of the end of the reporting period. If there is a delay in submission contact the AIP Authority before the due date to request an extension of time to submit the report. After completing the compliance report, the declaration should be read and confirmed by the nominated project proponent contact person on behalf of any other project proponents or the nominated facility operator on behalf of any other operators if applicable. It is not necessary to provide separate confirmations of acceptance from other proponents or operators. The contact person should submit the compliance report from within the SmartForm to the AIP Authority for acceptance. Do not email the report to the AIP Authority. Proponents and operators cannot retrieve or edit the report after it has been submitted. It is important that the nominated project proponent or facility operator contact person s details in Part A of the report are correct as their email address will be the only notification point from the AIP Authority for the report. Their details can be updated in the report. If the email address changes after the report is submitted contact the AIP Authority on 02 6213 6404. Compliance report assessment and acceptance Upon receipt of a compliance report, an AIP Authority Case Manager will review it and may return it in the SmartForm to the contact person with feedback or request additional information, usually within 10 business days. The proponent or operator should consider the feedback, make any changes required to the report and return it within 14 calendar days in the SmartForm to the AIP Authority. If the report is not returned by the case manager with further feedback it means it has been progressed for consideration.  6 User Guide for Jobs Act SmartForm Compliance Reports v.1 August 2021 A compliance report will not be accepted if it does not comply with the Rule s requirements. Adequately addressing all actions and questions in the report will assist project proponents and operators with complying with the Rule. When a compliance report is accepted by the AIP Authority the nominated project proponent or facility operator contact person will receive a SmartForm email notification of acceptance and a copy of the compliance report. The AIP Authority will also provide a SmartForm link to enable proponents and operators to complete the next report. AIP plan summary The AIP Authority is required to publish a summary of each draft AIP plan when it is first submitted for assessment. It is a Jobs Act requirement that summaries are published within one business day of receipt of the draft AIP plan. Summaries are published on the AIP Authority website Summaries remain on the website until the project is completed or in the case of projects that establish new facilities, until the end of the first two years of operations. If there are subsequent changes to the proponent operator or project details in the compliance reports the summary may need to be updated. Proponents or operators should download and update a Word version of their summary from the AIP Authority website and provide the updated version to the AIP Authority for publication. Changes to AIP actions will usually require a replacement AIP plan. Privacy and confidentiality Information collected by, or provided to, the AIP Authority in SmartForm compliance reports is protected information as defined under the Jobs Act. The use and disclosure by the AIP Authority of protected information is governed by Part 9 of the Jobs Act. The AIP Authority is also required to comply with the Privacy Act 1988 and the Department of Industry, Science, Energy and Resources Privacy Policy. Part 9 of the Jobs Act allows the AIP Authority to disclose compliance report information to third parties such as the Minister with responsibility for AIP, certain government agencies and with the consent of the proponent, to any other party. Proponents acknowledge in the compliance report declaration that these disclosures may occur. The SmartForm service is hosted by an external provider Avoka, part of the Temenos Infinity group. Avoka does not have permission to access protected information but the AIP Authority may allow it to access data in the SmartForm for incident diagnosis only. Proponents are responsible for ensuring the confidentiality of their SmartForm compliance reports during completion. Proponents should put in place arrangements to control internal access to the SmartForm to prevent unauthorised editing and printing of the report. Note that if SmartForm emails are forwarded by their recipient, the next recipient will be able to use the link to access and edit the report. It is recommended that only the nominated project proponent or facility operator contact person be authorised to make changes to the report. The AIP Authority can cancel a report if the proponent or operator believes the report s confidentiality has been breached.  7 User Guide for Jobs Act SmartForm Compliance Reports v.1 August 2021 Duration of approved AIP plans The AIP plan comes into force when the AIP Authority approves the AIP plan and continues throughout construction until project completion. For projects that establish new facilities, it continues until the end of the first two years of operations of the new facility. Record keeping The nominated project proponent and nominated facility operator must keep such records as are reasonably necessary to enable the AIP Authority to ascertain compliance at any time with Part B and or Part C of the AIP plan, and retain those records for five years after project completion or the initial operational period. Changes to approved AIP plans There may be changes to the information provided in an AIP plan after it is approved. This could include changes to the project proponent or operator details, project details, contact person details or website addresses. Proponents and operators can change these details in the compliance report. Where a project has not yet been completed, the nominated project proponent may submit another draft AIP plan with the intention of replacing the approved AIP plan. This may occur where the project has materially changed so that the approved AIP plan is no longer suitable or where there are changes to the AIP activities. The replacement AIP plan must be completed in SmartForm using the link sent by the AIP Authority when the original plan was approved. For a project that establishes a new facility, the nominated operator of the new facility may submit another draft AIP plan in replacement of Part C of the AIP plan approved by the AIP Authority. Replacement of an approved AIP plan may be required if the operator has different procurement practices and is unable to fulfil the steps in Part C of the original AIP plan. The operator will need to obtain the SmartForm link held by the nominated project proponent contact person to start the replacement AIP plan or contact the AIP Authority for the link. The link will open an editable version of the original AIP plan. Proponents and operators should amend the plan and submit it to the AIP Authority. A replacement AIP plan will undergo the same review and approval process as a draft AIP plan. Before replacing an approved AIP plan, proponents and operators should contact the AIP Authority to confirm that a replacement AIP plan is required. Cancellation of projects If a project is abandoned or cancelled, the nominated project proponent contact person must advise the AIP Authority of the cancellation within 60 days. The AIP Authority may ask for evidence of the cancellation such as media or ASX releases. Once cancellation is confirmed, the approved AIP plan ceases to be in force and the AIP plan summary will be removed from the AIP Authority website. Compliance reporting will be required until the date of cancellation. If a project with an approved AIP plan is placed on hold or delayed the AIP plan will remain in force. Proponents should advise the AIP Authority of any significant delays to projects as it may be possible to extend compliance reporting periods.  8 User Guide for Jobs Act SmartForm Compliance Reports v.1 August 2021 SmartForm Compliance Reports Navigation The SmartForm compliance reports have been designed to streamline the completion process for proponents and operators. The information from the approved AIP plan for the project is reproduced in the report. For each action from the AIP plan there is a text box to provide information on how it has been implemented. It is important to start at the first tab and enter information progressively through the tabs in order. This will ensure you get the maximum benefit from the SmartForm features. Once you have completed all the tabs you can go back and make edits to earlier responses if required. Most questions are mandatory. The SmartForm will prompt you if a question is unanswered or you don t select an option. Text boxes allow you to provide more information on an AIP plan action. These have character limits and the counter at the bottom of the text box shows how many characters are remaining. Each SmartForm compliance report has a reference code. This code is unique and can be used to access the report up until it is accepted. You should not share the code outside your organisation. If you think the confidentiality of the code has been breached you should contact the AIP Authority. Note if you print the compliance report the code will be included in the copy of the report. SmartForm allows you to send the completed report to another person in your organisation for review and or approval. However, the SmartForm does not support multiple users completing or editing the report at the same time. The AIP Authority therefore strongly recommends that completion, editing and submission of the report is carried out by one person only. This will avoid issues with multiple people trying to change the report at the same time. The nominated project proponent or facility operator contact person should be the person to complete, edit and submit the report. This person s email address will also be the only form of communication from the AIP Authority on the submitted report, including if there is feedback on the report and when the report is accepted. If the person or their email address changes after submission, contact the AIP Authority. Opening the SmartForm compliance report To open your SmartForm compliance report for the first time you will need your specific project link sent via email by the AIP Authority when the AIP plan was approved for your project Click on the link within the calendar reminder  9 User Guide for Jobs Act SmartForm Compliance Reports v.1 August 2021 If you are the nominated project proponent reporting on Part B of the approved AIP plan select Complete Project Compliance Report . If you are the nominated facility operator reporting on Part C of the approved AIP plan select Complete Operations Compliance Report . This will open the report for completion Once you have opened the report it will be assigned a report reference code and can be saved for later editing. Use the link that SmartForm sends you when you save the report to open it again. Do not click on the original link from the AIP plan approval email as a new report will then be generated. You must only submit one report for each reporting period. Do not use the original link for the subsequent compliance reports. These should be opened using the link sent by the AIP Authority when the previous compliance report was accepted. The About page has important information about the SmartForm compliance report. The tabs on the left hand side represent each of the sections of the report that you need to complete. A tick next to each tab indicates it has been completed successfully. Important information about the AIP plan and the report are available by hovering over the information symbols . See the next section of this User Guide for information on how to respond to each of the questions. Underneath the tabs are the SmartForm icons Save whenever you have finished editing the report save it by clicking on the Save icon. Note that if you do not access and save your report within 60 calendar days of your last save, it will expire and the report will be deleted. You will not be able to retrieve it and will need to start a new report. Open this allows you to re enter your report using your reference code. Print this generates a PDF copy of your report which you can print and distribute. User guide this opens the Compliance Reports User Guide which is this document. In addition, there will be a comments icon when you hover to the right of fields as below  10 User Guide for Jobs Act SmartForm Compliance Reports v.1 August 2021 If you click on the icon it opens up a text box where you can add comments relating to the response You can use it to leave reminders to yourself or make notes which can be read by other people that you send the report to see below . You can add to, edit or delete comments you or anyone else have made in the report. If you send the report to the AIP Authority the comments will be visible to the AIP Authority so make sure you delete any internal comments before sending it. Do not use the comments boxes to report on implementation of your AIP plan. After completion of the compliance report The last tab is the Proponent Action tab which requires you to select one of the following options after you have completed the report Send for internal review approval This option allows you to send the SmartForm compliance report to another person in your organisation for review and or approval. You will need to enter the person s email address and include a message instructing them on what to do with the report. You can only send the report to one email address at a time  11 User Guide for Jobs Act SmartForm Compliance Reports v.1 August 2021 The reviewer will receive an email from SmartForm with the link to open the report like this Note there is no email address checker in the SmartForm so ensure the email entered is correct. You will not receive bounce back emails for incorrect email addresses or out of office messages. Check with the reviewer that they received the report. If you send the report to an incorrect or dormant email address you cannot recall the send. Anyone receiving the link will be able to open, edit and print the report. You can, however, still access the report from your last saved email and re send it. This will not cancel the access to the report for the original email address you sent it to. If you believe the incorrect address you sent the report to will breach the confidentiality of the report, contact the AIP Authority to have the report cancelled. You can start a new version of the report by clicking on the original link sent by the AIP Authority. Once you send the report to the reviewer, they will be able to edit it. It is recommended, however, that only the nominated project proponent or facility operator contact person makes changes to the report. Any reviewers can provide their feedback against each response by clicking on the comments icons and entering their feedback in the comments text boxes. When they return the report to you their feedback comments will be visible to you. Note they must return the report to you from the Proponent Internal Review Approval Action tab by clicking Send Project Compliance Report Jobs Act You have been sent a Project Compliance Report Jobs Act for Next Project for review approval. Your message Your reference code is 672KQXWD. This saved version will expire on Thu Oct 22 19 29 52 AEDT 2020. If it is not saved or submitted before this date and time it w ill be permanently deleted. The above reference code may be required to open your report. Use the follow ing url, erenceNumber 672KQXWD to open this report.  12 User Guide for Jobs Act SmartForm Compliance Reports v.1 August 2021 The SmartForm will always return the report to the email address in Part A Nominated Project Proponent or Facility Operator Contact Person. The reviewer is not able to send the report to a different person or to the AIP Authority. You will receive an email from SmartForm with the link to open the report when it is returned by the reviewer. You may then send the report to another person for review or approval. While another person in your organisation can approve the report, the Declaration page should only be confirmed by the nominated project proponent or facility operator contact person. Their name appears at the start of the declaration and cannot be changed. The AIP Authority will take it that this person has confirmed the declaration and no other person has confirmed it. Note the SmartForm compliance report will expire if it is not accessed and saved within 60 days of you sending it to another person. Either the reviewer or yourself should save the report regularly by clicking on the Save icon and then clicking Confirm in the pop up box. You will receive an email from SmartForm with the link to re open your report Send to AIP Authority for approval This option is used to submit the report to the AIP Authority. All reports must be sent to the AIP Authority for acceptance. The nominated proponent or facility operator contact person will need to fully complete the report and confirm the Declaration before they can submit it from within the SmartForm by clicking Send. If there is information missing in any part of the report the SmartForm will advise you which questions require completion before you can submit it. Any comments left in the report will be visible to the AIP Authority. Once you submit the report you will not be able to retrieve it. From the Proponent Action tab, select Send to AIP Authority for approval and click Send. SmartForm will send an email to the AIP Authority aip industry.gov.au advising the report has been submitted. You will receive a copy of the email from SmartForm as confirmation it has been sent. Your AIP Authority Case Manager will review the report and may return it to you in SmartForm with feedback comments for updating. If the report is returned you will receive an email from SmartForm like this  13 User Guide for Jobs Act SmartForm Compliance Reports v.1 August 2021 You should consider any feedback, update the report, send it for internal review or approval and return it within 14 calendar days to the AIP Authority in the SmartForm. Delays in returning the updated report could result in non compliance. If there is no further feedback from your case manager, they will forward your report to the AIP Authority for consideration. If the report is accepted by the AIP Authority, you will receive an email from SmartForm confirming the acceptance with a copy of the compliance report and a link to start the next compliance report. This email is the formal notice of acceptance of the report from the AIP Authority. If the report is not accepted by the AIP Authority, you will receive an email from SmartForm with the reasons and the report will be returned to you in SmartForm for updating. You must update the report and return it to the AIP Authority within 14 calendar days.  14 User Guide for Jobs Act SmartForm Compliance Reports v.1 August 2021 How to answer each question in the compliance reports This section describes how to complete the questions in both the Project and Operations Compliance Reports. The information on questions is from the Project Compliance Report but the questions in the Operations Compliance Report are the same. The compliance reports have the same format as the AIP plan. Each question has the action from the approved AIP plan followed by a text box in which proponents and operators should describe how the action has been implemented during the reporting period. This is followed by a function that enables evidence of the implementation to be uploaded to the report. There are also comments icons next to each question. These are for reviewers of the report and the AIP Authority to provide feedback. Do not use these comments boxes to report on implementation of the AIP plan. If there is insufficient space in a text box attach the additional information using the upload evidence function for that question. Some of the questions allow proponents and operators to modify the information from the approved AIP plan. This is the preferred method for advising the AIP Authority of changes to information in the AIP plan such as proponent, project and contact details. The AIP Authority will advise if an updated AIP plan summary is required for the changes. If information that is not amendable in the reports needs to be changed a replacement AIP plan will be required. All references to you and your in the compliance reports refers to the nominated project proponent for Project Compliance Reports and the nominated facility operator for Operations Compliance Reports. It is important to provide information on how the AIP plan was implemented during the reporting period only. SmartForm will include your responses from the previous report if applicable and these should be updated by you. If there was no implementation activity during the reporting period for an action state this and provide an explanation. Do not provide information on future activities in the report. A copy of the SmartForm Project Compliance Report is at the end of this User Guide. The following provides more information on how to answer each question in the reports. Part A Title Project Operations Compliance Report Select the Project or Operations Compliance Report number from the list. Select the Compliance reporting period start date by clicking on the date symbol and selecting the first day of the reporting period. If you are completing the first Project Compliance Report for the project this will be the date when the AIP plan was approved. For all subsequent Project Compliance Reports this will be the day after the end date of the last compliance reporting period. For the first Operations Compliance Report this will be the date when procurement for the initial operations phase of the new facility commenced. For subsequent Operations Compliance Reports this will be the day after the end date of the last compliance reporting period. The SmartForm will populate the Compliance reporting period end date. Do not change this date unless you have been advised by the AIP Authority of a different end date for the reporting period. If the project was completed during the reporting period select the date of completion. The SmartForm will populate the Compliance report due date. Do not change this date unless you have been advised by the AIP Authority of a different due date. You must submit the report to the AIP Authority by the due date. If you are unable to submit the report by the due date, contact the AIP Authority before the due date to request an extension.  15 User Guide for Jobs Act SmartForm Compliance Reports v.1 August 2021 Nominated Project Proponent Details Check the nominated project proponent details are correct. If not, enter the ABN, ACN or name of the nominated project proponent in the Search field. The SmartForm will search for the entity matching those details. Select the correct entity. Check the contact person details are correct. If not, enter the name, position title, phone number and email address of the nominated project proponent s contact person for the AIP Authority. This person will be the point of contact between the nominated proponent and the AIP Authority, and will be responsible for completing the SmartForm compliance report and submitting it to the AIP Authority. SmartForm will send all communications on the report from the AIP Authority to this person s email address only. The details of this contact person will not be published and are for the AIP Authority s use only. The nominated proponent s contact person must be a director or employee of the nominated project proponent or its holding entity and not an external person or agent. Postal Address Check the postal address is correct. If not, enter the nominated project proponent s postal address in the Search field. The SmartForm will search for the address. Select the correct address. Check the proponent type is correct. If not, select the nominated project proponent s proponent type from the available options Single Company, Joint Venture, Public Private Partnership or Government Agency. Other Project Proponent Details Check the other project proponent details are correct if applicable. If not, provide details for all other project proponents involved in the project which have discharged their AIP plan responsibilities to the nominated project proponent. Enter the details for each other project proponent s by selecting Add project proponent and searching for the correct entity. Add each other proponent in another row. Project Details Project name Check the project name is correct. If not, enter the name of the project. Project location Check the project location is correct. If not, enter the physical location of the project. This should be the street address if applicable , suburb or other location and the state or territory. If there are multiple locations, enter the principal location. Project type Check the project type is correct. If not, select the type of facility being established upgraded by the project from the available options Airport Electricity facility Factory Land transport facility Mine or quarry Passenger terminal Petroleum facility Sewage or wastewater facility Telecommunications network Water supply facility Wharf or other port facility Other productive facility  16 User Guide for Jobs Act SmartForm Compliance Reports v.1 August 2021 If more than one type of facility is being established upgraded, select the principal type of facility for the project. If selecting Other productive facility provide a description of the facility being established or upgraded. Project purpose The Project purpose describes the principal purpose of the project as either to upgrade an existing eligible facility or establish a new eligible facility. It will have been pre populated from the AIP Notification or by the AIP Authority and cannot be amended by the proponent in SmartForm. If the Project Purpose needs to be changed contact the AIP Authority. Project capital expenditure Check the estimate of the total expenditure of a capital nature for the project in Australian dollars AUD . If it needs to be updated either enter the total estimated capital expenditure value, select from the range of estimated capital expenditure values or confirm the estimated capital expenditure value will be 500 million or more. Project description Check the project description. If it needs to be updated enter a full description of the project including principal activities and components, timelines and procurement strategy. This description should provide enough information for Australian entities to determine if they are suitable to provide goods and services to the project. Project completion date Check the project completion date. If it needs to be updated select the estimated date for completion of the construction phase of the project by clicking on the calendar icon. If the exact date is not determined, enter the last day of the month of completion. Project update Provide a project update for the reporting period in the text box and an explanation for any changes you have made to the proponent or project details. Part B Opportunities to supply key goods and services Select Yes or No to the question on have you or your procurement entities conducted any AIP plan implementation activities during the reporting period. This refers to any of the actions from Part B of the AIP plan such as maintaining a project opportunities website. If you select No provide an explanation such as project delays. You will still be required to complete and submit the report. Indicative List of Key Goods and Services for the Project Select Yes or No to the question on is the indicative list of key goods and services from the AIP plan still current. Refer to your AIP plan for the list. If you select No provide an explanation of the changes. Maintain Understanding of Australian Industry Capability The actions from your approved AIP plan are reproduced in the report. Enter information in the text box on how you implemented these actions to ensure your procurement entities maintained a current understanding of Australian industry capability. Upload evidence of implementation, such as market research for potential suppliers, Industry Capability Network ICN engagement or a supplier database.  17 User Guide for Jobs Act SmartForm Compliance Reports v.1 August 2021 Project Standards The standards information from your approved AIP plan is reproduced in the report. Enter information in the text box on how you ensured the project standards were implemented on the project. Upload evidence of implementation, such as the design standards specified in requests for tender. Part B Contacts and Information for Suppliers Project Proponent Contact Person Check the details of the contact person for supplier enquiries. If they need to be updated enter the new details. Procurement Entity Contact Person The confirmation from your approved AIP plan is reproduced in the report. Enter information in the text box on how you ensured your procurement entities had a procurement contact person for the project. If you are the sole procurement entity for the project confirm this in the text box. Project Proponent Website Check the project proponent website details. If they need to be updated enter the new details. Upload evidence of the website, such as a copy of the web page with details of the project. Project Opportunities Website Check the project opportunities website details. If they need to be updated enter the new details. Upload evidence of the website, such as a copy of the web page displaying the opportunities. Procurement Entity Website The actions from your approved AIP plan are reproduced in the report. Enter information in the text box on how you ensured your procurement entities published the required information. If you are the sole procurement entity for the project describe how you have published this information. Upload evidence of implementation, such as the web page that displays the details. Part B Communication and Bid Processes Engagement and Communication The actions from your approved AIP plan are reproduced in the report. Enter information in the text boxes on how you implemented these actions during the reporting period. Upload evidence of implementation, such as engagement with industry associations and vendor identification agencies, supplier briefing presentations and media releases. AIP Training The actions from your approved AIP plan are reproduced in the report. Enter information in the text box on how you implemented these actions during the reporting period. Upload evidence of implementation, such as AIP policies, AIP training materials and workshops with procurement staff.  18 User Guide for Jobs Act SmartForm Compliance Reports v.1 August 2021 Equal Bid Timeframes The confirmation from your approved AIP plan is reproduced in the report. Enter information in the text box on how you ensured your procurement entities provided equal bid timeframes. If you are the sole procurement entity for the project enter information on how you provided equal bid timeframes. Upload evidence of implementation, such as web pages or tender documents that specify the closing date for expressions of interest or bids. Part B Building Australian Industry Capability Capability Development The actions from your approved AIP plan are reproduced in the report. Enter information in the text boxes on how you implemented these actions during the reporting period. Upload evidence of implementation, such as support for suppliers to become accredited, supplier development workshops and examples of technology transfer and alliance building. Global Supply Chain Integration The actions from your approved AIP plan are reproduced in the report. Enter information in the text boxes on how you implemented these actions during the reporting period. Upload evidence of implementation, such as introductions to global suppliers, support to register with databases and facilitating supplier accreditations. Feedback The actions from your approved AIP plan are reproduced in the report. Enter information in the text box on how you implemented these actions during the reporting period. Upload evidence of implementation, such as template emails offering feedback to unsuccessful suppliers and referrals to training programs. Supplier Performance Provide any details or observations you have in the text box of the capability, capacity and competitiveness of Australian suppliers to the project. This information will help the AIP Authority to work with government agencies to improve the capability of Australian suppliers. AIP Plan Effectiveness Rate the effectiveness of your AIP plan actions to date against the four criteria and provide any supporting comments in the text boxes. This information will help the AIP Authority to determine the outcomes of AIP plans. Part B Procurement of Key Goods and Services Sourcing Decisions Select Yes or No to the question on were any contracts awarded for key goods and services 1 million and above by you or your procurement entities during the reporting period. If you select Yes complete the Sourcing Decisions table available from the link and upload it to the report. Only include details of contracts awarded by you or your procurement entities during the reporting period. Estimate the percentage of Australian content for each contract. This should be the value of work to be performed in Australia under the contract manufacture of goods and services performed by Australian employees . It does not mean a contract has been awarded to an Australian entity ABN holder . Estimate the percentage for contract awards to both Australian and non Australian entities. Enter data into the template and do not modify the template s wording or layout.  19 User Guide for Jobs Act SmartForm Compliance Reports v.1 August 2021 Ongoing Commitment Summary Provide the cumulative commitments you have made to Australian and non Australian entities for the project in Australian dollars millions . In the first row enter in the cumulative commitments up to the day before the reporting period. In the second row enter in the commitments value of contracts awarded for the reporting period start date to end date . Include all contracts including those below 1 million. Do not include subcontracts awarded by your procurement entities that they will fund. Adjustments to previously reported commitments Describe any adjustments made to commitments previously reported in the Ongoing Commitment Summary. This could be due to variations in awarded contracts. Forecast Major Contracts List any 1 million and above contracts likely to be awarded by you or your procurement entities during the next reporting period. For each contract, provide a description and then select the contract value and the contractor type.  20 User Guide for Jobs Act SmartForm Compliance Reports v.1 August 2021 Answers to common queries about Jobs Act compliance reports Q Can we defer completing the reports until we are certain our project is going ahead A Once the AIP plan is approved for a project you must report on its implementation even if there has been minimal activity on the project. Q. Should we wait until we select our procurement entities before completing the reports A. There is no need to wait until you select your procurement entities. You must report on implementation of the AIP plan from the date it is approved. Q. Are there any examples of good compliance reports the AIP Authority can share with us A. There are many variations in reports due to project scope, size and sector so it is difficult to provide an example of a report that would cover all these variations. This user guide includes examples of the evidence that proponents should provide with their reports. Q. Can we develop our compliance report on our own template A. Proponents must use the SmartForm compliance reports if their AIP plan was done in SmartForm. This ensures you address all the requirements of the Jobs Act compliance report rules. The SmartForm has features to make it easier for you to complete and submit the report. Reports submitted on different templates, including any previous paper based report templates put out by the AIP Authority, will not be accepted. Q. Do we need to report if we are required to develop a state or territory industry plan A. If you are required to develop a state or territory industry participation plan you may get an exception from doing the Jobs Act AIP plan and compliance reports. Contact the AIP Authority for more details. Q. We have several Jobs Act AIP plans for other projects and would like to do one report. A. AIP plans and compliance reports are specific to each project you are developing so they cannot be combined into one report. Q. Can we submit the draft report without confirming the declaration in case there is feedback A. The SmartForm requires you to confirm the declaration before you can send the report to the AIP Authority. There may be no feedback required on your report in which case the declaration needs to be confirmed before it progresses to the AIP Authority for consideration. Q. How can we get the other project proponent s and facility operator s to sign off the report A. You may circulate the PDF copy of the draft report to the other parties for their agreement prior to submission. The AIP Authority does not need to see confirmation from any other project proponents or other operators that they agree to the report. It is taken that the person confirming the declaration in the plan has the authority to do so on behalf of all parties and all parties have been made aware of and accept the report. Q. Will the AIP Authority acknowledge receipt of our report submission A. SmartForm will cc you into the email we receive alerting us to your submission so you know it has reached us. We will not acknowledge receipt but if there is feedback on the report, your Case Manager will return the report to you in SmartForm, usually within 10 business days. If you haven t heard from us after 30 calendar days contact us on 02 6213 6404.  21 User Guide for Jobs Act SmartForm Compliance Reports v.1 August 2021 Q. Should we email a copy of the report to the AIP Authority A. It is not necessary to email copies of the report at any stage to the AIP Authority, including your early drafts for review. SmartForm is the platform for submitting and receiving acceptance of reports. Q. Can the AIP Authority modify the content of our report after we submit it A. The only fields the AIP Authority can modify in a submitted report are in Part A Nominated Project Proponent details. This allows the AIP Authority to update the email address so the report can be returned to the correct person. Any other changes to the report can only be done by the proponent or operator after the report is returned to them by the AIP Authority. Q. Will the AIP Authority send a formal letter of approval for our report A. SmartForm will send an email notification of acceptance to the nominated project proponent or facility operator contact person when the report is accepted. This is the formal notification from the AIP Authority and letters will not be sent.  22 User Guide for Jobs Act SmartForm Compliance Reports v.1 August 2021 The Jobs Act SmartForm Project Compliance Report  23 User Guide for Jobs Act SmartForm Compliance Reports v.1 August 2021  24 User Guide for Jobs Act SmartForm Compliance Reports v.1 August 2021 SAMPLE ONLY DO NOT COMPLETE  25 User Guide for Jobs Act SmartForm Compliance Reports v.1 August 2021  26 User Guide for Jobs Act SmartForm Compliance Reports v.1 August 2021 SAMPLE ONLY DO NOT COMPLETE  27 User Guide for Jobs Act SmartForm Compliance Reports v.1 August 2021  28 User Guide for Jobs Act SmartForm Compliance Reports v.1 August 2021  29 User Guide for Jobs Act SmartForm Compliance Reports v.1 August 2021 SAMPLE ONLY DO NOT COMPLETE  30 User Guide for Jobs Act SmartForm Compliance Reports v.1 August 2021  31 User Guide for Jobs Act SmartForm Compliance Reports v.1 August 2021  32 User Guide for Jobs Act SmartForm Compliance Reports v.1 August 2021  33 User Guide for Jobs Act SmartForm Compliance Reports v.1 August 2021 SAMPLE ONLY DO NOT COMPLETE  34 User Guide for Jobs Act SmartForm Compliance Reports v.1 August 2021  35 User Guide for Jobs Act SmartForm Compliance Reports v.1 August 2021  36 User Guide for Jobs Act SmartForm Compliance Reports v.1 August 2021  37 User Guide for Jobs Act SmartForm Compliance Reports v.1 August 2021  38 User Guide for Jobs Act SmartForm Compliance Reports v.1 August 2021  39 User Guide for Jobs Act SmartForm Compliance Reports v.1 August 2021 SAMPLE ONLY DO NOT COMPLETE  40 User Guide for Jobs Act SmartForm Compliance Reports v.1 August 2021 SAMPLE ONLY DO NOT COMPLETE 