 PORTFOLIO BUDGET STATEMENTS 2022 23 BUDGET RELATED PAPER NO. 1.11 INDUSTRY, SCIENCE AND RESOURCES PORTFOLIO Budget Initiatives and Explanations of Appropriations Specified by Outcomes and Programs by Entity   Commonwealth of Australia 2022 ISSN 978 1 76044 330 6 This publication is available for your use under a Creative Commons BY Attribution 3.0 Australia licence, with the exception of the Commonwealth Coat of Arms, the Department of Industry, Science and Resources logo, photographs, images, signatures and where otherwise stated. The full licence terms are available from Use of the Department of Industry, Science and Resources material under a Creative Commons BY Attribution 3.0 Australia licence requires you to attribute the work but not in any way that suggests that the Department of Industry, Science and Resources endorses you or your use of the work . Department of Industry, Science and Resources material used as supplied Provided you have not modified or transformed the Department of Industry, Science and Resources material in any way including, for example, by changing the Department of Industry, Science and Resources text calculating percentage changes graphing or charting data or deriving new statistics from published Department of Industry, Science and Resources statistics then the Department of Industry, Science and Resources prefers the following attribution Source The Australian Government Department of Industry, Science and Resources Derivative material If you have modified or transformed the Department of Industry, Science and Resources material, or derived new material from the Department of Industry, Science and Resources in any way, then the Department of Industry, Science and Resources prefers the following attribution Based on The Australian Government Department of Industry, Science and Resources Use of the Coat of Arms The terms under which the Coat of Arms can be used are set out on the Department of the Prime Minister and Cabinet website See coat arms . Other uses Enquiries regarding this licence and any other use of this document are welcome. Please contact the Chief Finance Officer, Department of Industry, Science and Resources on 02 6213 6000.   iii President of the Senate Australian Senate Parliament House CANBERRA ACT 2600 Speaker House of Representatives Parliament House CANBERRA ACT 2600 Dear President Dear Mr Speaker We hereby submit October Portfolio Budget Statements in support of the 2022 23 October Budget for the Industry, Science and Resources portfolio. These statements have been developed, and are submitted to the Parliament, as a statement on the outcomes for the portfolio. We present these statements to provide accountability to the Parliament and, through it, the public. Yours sincerely The Hon Madeleine King MP The Hon Ed Husic MP   Page iv Abbreviations and conventions The following notations may be used NEC nec not elsewhere classified nil .. not zero, but rounded to zero na not applicable unless otherwise specified nfp not for publication m million b billion Figures in tables and in the text may be rounded. Figures in text are generally rounded to one decimal place, whereas figures in tables are generally rounded to the nearest thousand. Discrepancies in tables between totals and sums of components are due to rounding. Enquiries Should you have any enquiries regarding this publication, please contact the Chief Finance Officer, Department of Industry, Science and Resources on 02 6213 6000. Links to Portfolio Budget Statements including Portfolio Additional Estimates Statements and Portfolio Supplementary Additional Estimates Statements can be located on the Australian Government Budget website at   User Guide User Guide To The Portfolio Budget Statements   Page vi User guide User guide The purpose of the October 2022 23 Portfolio Budget Statements PB Statements is to inform Senators and Members of Parliament of the proposed allocation of resources to government outcomes by entities within the portfolio. Entities receive resources from the annual appropriations acts, special appropriations including standing appropriations and special accounts , and revenue from other sources. A key role of the PB Statements is to facilitate the understanding of proposed annual appropriations in Appropriation Bills No. 1 and No. 2 2022 23 or Appropriation Parliamentary Departments Bill No. 1 2022 23 for the parliamentary departments . In this sense, the PB Statements are Budget related papers and are declared by the Appropriation Acts to be relevant documents to the interpretation of the Acts according to section 15AB of the Acts Interpretation Act 1901. The PB Statements provide information, explanation and justification to enable Parliament to understand the purpose of each outcome proposed in the Bills. As required under section 12 of the Charter of Budget Honesty Act 1998, only entities within the general government sector are included as part of the Commonwealth general government sector fiscal estimates and produce PB Statements where they receive funding either directly or via portfolio departments through the annual appropriation acts. The Commonwealth Performance Framework The following diagram outlines the key components of the enhanced Commonwealth performance framework. The diagram identifies the content of each of the publications and the relationship between them. Links to the publications for each entity within the portfolio can be found in the introduction to Section 2 Outcomes and planned performance.   User Guide Page vii Commonwealth Performance Framework Key components of relevant publications Portfolio Budget Statements October Portfolio based Corporate Plan November Entity based Supports Annual Appropriations. Informs Senators and Members of Parliament of the proposed allocation of other resources to government outcomes and programs. Provides links to relevant programs undertaken by other Commonwealth entities. Provides high level performance information for current, ongoing programs, particularly a forecast of performance for the current year. Provides detailed prospective performance information for proposed new budget measures that require a new program or significantly change an existing program. Primary planning document of a Commonwealth entity. Sets out the purposes of the entity, the activities it will undertake to achieve its purposes and the results it expects to achieve over a minimum four year period. Describes the environment in which the entity operates, the capability it requires to undertake activities and a discussion of risk. Explains how the entity s performance will be measured and assessed. Annual Performance Statement October following year Entity based Included in the Commonwealth entity s Annual Report. Focuses on recent performance. Reports on the actual performance results for the year against the forecasts made in the corporate plan and Portfolio Budget Statements, and provides other performance information relevant to the entity. Provides an analysis of the factors that contributed to the entity s performance results.   This page is intentionally blank   Contents User guide vi Industry, Science and Resources Portfolio Overview 3 Entity resources and planned performance. 7 Department of Industry, Science and Resources 9 Australian Nuclear Science and Technology Organisation 73 Commonwealth Scientific and Industrial Research Organisation 103 Geoscience Australia 131 IP Australia 155 National Offshore Petroleum Safety and Environmental Management Authority 179   This page is intentionally blank   Portfolio Overview   This page is intentionally blank   Portfolio overview Page 3 Industry, Science and Resources Portfolio overview Ministers and portfolio responsibilities The Hon Madeleine King MP is responsible for Resources. Minister King is charged with Growing national prosperity, through a strong and resilient resources sector that continues to create good, sustainable, high value jobs, including in regional and remote Australia. Ensuring the Australian resources sector plays an integral role in the transition to net zero. Creating new investment and new export market opportunities by promoting Australia as a reliable, responsible and sustainable partner for the supply of resources to the world. Working with the resources sector to better meet community expectations and strengthen relationships with First Nations landholders, communities and organisations. The Hon Ed Husic MP is responsible for Industry and Science. Minister Husic is charged with Driving the transformation, growth and competitiveness of Australia s industries and building domestic capability to meet the needs of the Australian economy. Embedding science as the foundation for decision making and ensuring Australia s scientific endeavours are translated into real world applications that benefit Australians and the Australian economy. Supporting the growth of Australia s digital and technology ecosystem. Ensuring Australia remains at the forefront of critical technologies. Identifying and managing risks and opportunities emerging from transitioning to a more resilient and modern economy. Leading cooperation with industry, government and international partners to identify and mitigate vulnerabilities in Australia s critical supply chains, and improve business ability to respond to crises. Minister Husic s portfolio is supported by Senator the Hon Tim Ayres, Assistant Minister for Manufacturing.   Portfolio Budget Statements Page 4 Portfolio overview The portfolio was established by the Administrative Arrangements Orders made on 23 June 2022 and comprises Department of Industry, Science and Resources the department The department supports economic growth, productivity and job creation for Australians investing in science, technology and commercialisation, growing innovative and competitive businesses, industries and regions. The department backs Australia s strong resources sector by supporting the development of Australia s mineral and energy resources for the benefit of the nation. Australian Nuclear Science and Technology Organisation ANSTO ANSTO is Australia s national nuclear research and development organisation and the custodian of Australia s nuclear capabilities and expertise, including the provision of life saving nuclear medicines for Australians. Commonwealth Scientific and Industrial Research Organisation CSIRO CSIRO is Australia s national science agency and innovation catalyst, collaborating across sectors to boost innovation performance to solve Australia s greatest challenges through innovative science and technology. Geoscience Australia Geoscience Australia is Australia s national public sector geoscience organisation and the nation s trusted adviser on the geology and geography of Australia. Geoscience Australia applies science and technology to describe and understand the Earth for the benefit of Australia. IP Australia IP Australia is responsible for administering Australia s intellectual property rights system, specifically trademarks, patents, designs and plant breeder s rights. National Offshore Petroleum Safety and Environmental Management Authority NOPSEMA NOPSEMA is responsible for regulating the workplace health and safety, well integrity and environmental management of petroleum and greenhouse gas storage operations in Commonwealth waters. For information on resourcing across the portfolio, please refer to Part 1 Agency Financial Resourcing in October Budget Paper No. 4 Agency Resourcing.  Portfolio Budget Statements Portfolio overview Page 5 Figure 1 Industry, Science and Resources portfolio structure and outcomes IP Australia Director General Mr Michael Schwager Outcome Increased innovation, investment and trade in Australia, and by Australians overseas, through the administration of the registrable intellectual property rights system, promoting public awareness and industry engagement, and advising government Minister for Industry and Science The Hon Ed Husic MP Assistant Minister for Manufacturing and Assistant Minister for Trade Senator the Hon Tim Ayres Department of Industry, Science and Resources Portfolio Secretary Ms Meghan Quinn PSM Outcome Support economic growth, productivity and job creation for all Australians by investing in science, technology and commercialisation, growing innovative and competitive businesses, industries and regions, and supporting resources Commonwealth Scientific and Industrial Research Organisation CSIRO Chief Executive Dr Larry Marshall Outcome Innovative scientific and technology solutions to national challenges and opportunities to benefit industry, the environment and the community, through scientific research and capability development, services and advice Geoscience Australia GA Chief Executive Officer Dr James Johnson Outcome Informed government, industry and community decisions on the economic, social and environmental management of the nation s natural resources through enabling access to geoscientific and spatial information National Offshore Petroleum Safety and Environmental Management Authority NOPSEMA Chief Executive Officer Mr Stuart Smith Outcome Promote and enforce the effective management of risks to the workforce, the environment and the structural integrity of facilities, wells and well related equipment of the Australian offshore petroleum and greenhouse gas storage industries through regulatory oversight Minister for Resources and Minister for Northern Australia The Hon Madeleine King MP Australian Nuclear Science and Technology Organisation ANSTO Chief Executive Officer Mr Shaun Jenkinson Outcome Improved knowledge, innovative capacity and healthcare through nuclear based facilities, research, training, products, services and advice to government, industry, the education sector and the Australian population  This page is intentionally blank This page is intentionally blank   Entity resources and planned performance Department of Industry, Science and Resources 9 Australian Nuclear Science and Technology Organisation 73 Commonwealth Scientific and Industrial Research Organisation 103 Geoscience Australia 131 IP Australia 155 National Offshore Petroleum Safety and Environmental Management Authority 179     9 DEPARTMENT O Department of Industry, Science and Resources Entity resources and planned performance     Department of Industry, Science and Resources Section 1 Entity overview and resources 13 1.1 Strategic direction statement 13 1.2 Entity resource statement 19 1.3 Budget measures 22 Section 2 Outcomes and planned performance 24 2.1 Budgeted expenses and performance for Outcome 1 25 2.2 Budgeted expenses and performance for Outcome 2 52 2.3 Budgeted expenses and performance for Outcome 3 55 Section 3 Budgeted financial statements 58 3.1 Budgeted financial statements 58   12   Department of Industry, Science and Resources Page 13 Department of Industry, Science and Resources Section 1 Entity overview and resources 1.1 Strategic direction statement The Department of Industry, Science and Resources the department supports the economy to become more productive, science and technology enriched and resilient to create jobs for all Australians. The work of the department supports economic prosperity across the country, including in regional Australia, and will help drive the global transition to a low carbon future. Australia s resources sector and industry will play a vital role in this transition. The resources sector drives economic growth, creates regional jobs, lifts the standard of living for Australians, and fosters innovation and productivity. Traditional commodities, including energy resources, will continue to support Australia s economy and supply global demand while contributing to energy security through the transition to net zero by 2050. A key objective is for Australia to remain a stable and reliable energy supplier to both our domestic industries and regional partners, supplying the energy we all need to realise our emission reduction goals. Gas has an important role in our energy mix, providing firming to the energy grid to complement the increasing contribution of renewables. Gas is critical to the industries that rely on it as a feedstock for manufacturing products, including plastics and fertiliser. The department is implementing reforms to secure our domestic supply, including by reforming the Australian Domestic Gas Security Mechanism ADGSM and monitoring the effectiveness of the new Heads of Agreement signed with East Coast LNG exporters on 29 September 2022. The Government has committed 65.7 million to the Australian Competition and Consumer Commission and the department s oversight of domestic gas supply. Through program delivery and stakeholder engagement the department is supporting the Government s intention for the resources sector to diversify, add value, and seize new opportunities in critical minerals. Critical minerals supply chains are pivotal to reducing global emissions. Demand for critical minerals is set to continue to grow, driven by increased uptake of clean energy technologies, from lithium ion batteries to solar panels, and wind turbines to electric vehicles. The 99.8 million Critical Minerals Development Program will help early and mid stage critical mineral projects overcome technical and market barriers.   Portfolio Budget Statements Page 14 Department of Industry, Science and Resources Six grants have been approved under the program 15.5 million for Alpha HPA Ltd s HPA First Product Expansion Project to add new capabilities to the ultra pure aluminium chemical plant and produce materials for the lithium ion battery and synthetic sapphire markets 15 million to accelerate Cobalt Blue Holdings Definitive Feasibility Study for its projects to produce intermediate and battery ready cobalt products in Australia 6 million for EQ Resources tungsten project for use in metal alloys for defence, transport and other applications 4 million for Global Advanced Metals Pty Ltd s Tantalum and Tin Recovery Plant to increase the volume of tantalum that is produced in Australia. Up to 5.2 million for Lava Blue s project to develop modular re processing technology to recover high purity alumina, magnesium and other critical minerals from vanadium mine waste and 3.9 million for Mineral Commodities Ltd to develop an Australian integrated graphite ore to battery anodes business, producing battery grade graphite. The Government is establishing a 50.5 million Australian Critical Minerals Research and Development Hub, which will bring together globally recognised experts within Geoscience Australia, CSIRO, and ANSTO to prioritise and advance strategically significant projects, work with the research community and industry to build and commercialise Australian IP, and collaborate with Australia s international partners. There is also a 2.0 million commitment to invest in a Resources Centre of Excellence Hub to provide mine workers and the resources community with access to training and emerging technologies to support future employment and growth opportunities. Consistent with the Government s commitment to protecting Australia s unique environment and supporting Australia s sector to be a leader in the transition to net zero, the Government is delivering 10.0 million to fund research, development and demonstration projects for commercial methane abatement in the resources sector. A key focus for the department is establishing the 15 billion National Reconstruction Fund NRF , the first step in the Government s plan to diversify and transform Australia s industry and economy to secure future prosperity. The NRF will provide finance to drive investments that add value and capability in the following seven priority areas Renewables and low emission technologies Medical science Value add in resources  Portfolio Budget Statements Department of Industry, Science and Resources Page 15 Transport Value add in agriculture, forestry and fisheries Defence capability Enabling capabilities, such as data science, artificial intelligence AI , robotics, and quantum. The NRF will be governed by an independent board, with investment decisions made by the board based on the Government s priorities. The NRF will be underpinned by co investment plans, which will identify high level investment opportunities and broader potential reforms to support growth and competitiveness in Australian industry. The Government is looking to the future and seizing strategic and critical opportunities to complement the work of the NRF as part the Government s A Future Made in Australia agenda. This includes Implementing a 10 point Buy Australian Plan to improve the way Australian Government contracts work, ensuring more opportunities are available to Australian businesses and their employees. Recent years have demonstrated that government procurement policy is a major economic lever to drive economic recovery from COVID 19. 14.2 million for a National Rail Manufacturing Plan to help stimulate the Australian rail industry to build more trains in Australia and support skilled manufacturing jobs. Implementation of the Plan includes establishing an Office of National Rail Industry Coordination, appointing a Rail Supplier Advocate, and establishing a Rail Industry Innovation Council. Developing Australia s first National Battery Strategy with a shared vision and actions to grow an end to end Australian battery industry. Initiatives under the measure Supporting Australian Industry are a part of the Government s commitment to back local manufacturing and ensure that Australia is a country that can make things again, including by mobilising our science and technology capabilities. Eight grants are being provided to critical and strategic businesses, mostly in regional communities, to boost local jobs, help support businesses to transition to net zero and strengthen vulnerable critical supply chains exposed by the pandemic. These include 50.0 million to upgrade the Nyrstar Hobart zinc smelter in Tasmania to produce low carbon zinc. 17.2 million to establish a pilot Food Manufacturing Innovation Hub on the Central Coast of New South Wales. 12.6 million for Cytiva s Springfield Biopark project in Queensland to build capability for a highly skilled manufacturing workforce.   Portfolio Budget Statements Page 16 Department of Industry, Science and Resources 11.1 million for upgrades to Ingham s Sorell poultry facility in Tasmania to support sustainable manufacturing in Australia s poultry sector. 10.1 million to expand Flinders University s Factory of the Future in South Australia and establish the Manufacturing Growth Accelerator Program. 6.1 million to upgrade the Waverly Wool Mill in Tasmania to transform Australia s oldest textile mill to a state of the art sustainable wool recycling facility. 2.1 million to support a feasibility study to replace the coal fired boiler at the Norske Skog Boyer Mill in Tasmania, to enable Norske Skog to transition to a cleaner production line. 2.1 million to expand the Coast Group berry distribution centre in Tasmania, to allow Tasmania s berry industry to expand regional production of berries. Having a high level of consumer confidence in Australian goods and services is crucial for driving exports, economic growth and business innovation. This occurs through enhancing regulatory settings for businesses and communities to encourage ethical and sustainable market growth while reducing obstacles to collaboration and investment. In this Budget this includes 6.1 million to support Ethical Clothing Australia to expand a national ethical accreditation arrangement for the Australian textile, clothing and footwear TCF industry. This will help local and international consumers choose ethical Australian TCF products. 1.6 million to work with the seafood and hospitality sectors to develop implementation options for mandatory country of origin labelling for seafood in hospitality, to help consumers know if the seafood they order is Australian, while minimising costs and compliance burden on business. Technology plays a critical role in the Australian economy, from assisting businesses to grow, improve productivity and further innovate, to helping keep Australians safe in the event of natural disasters. It is crucial for Australia to become an even more resilient economy by building sovereign capabilities in critical technologies, backing our competitive strengths, and opening opportunities for all Australians. These opportunities in the digital economy will underpin our future success and help build a stronger, fairer and more productive economy. The department is supporting the Government s work to harness Australia s science and technology capabilities and help ensure that Australia realises the opportunities offered by digital transformation, while putting in place the foundations to make the most of new and emerging technologies like AI, robotics, and quantum computing. Together this work will support Australia to achieve the Government s target of 1.2 million tech related jobs by 2030. In this Budget, this includes  Portfolio Budget Statements Department of Industry, Science and Resources Page 17 13.5 million for enhancing government s access to expert advice on critical technologies to ensure Australia can capture opportunities and manage the risks associated with critical technologies. This will further enable Australia to maintain cutting edge critical technology development and increase our nation s future prosperity, productivity and economic resilience while balancing our national security risks. Development of a National Quantum Strategy to ensure Australia can capitalise on its existing quantum technology capability and train the next generation of quantum technology specialists. This includes 4.8 million to provide support for quantum researchers to help attract and retain our nation s quantum talent onshore. Quantum technologies promise breakthroughs in many critical sectors, however Australia s quantum talent is being drawn away by overseas opportunities. This initiative will support 20 PhDs in quantum technologies and enable universities to kick start national collaboration on quantum research and education. Support for a Digital and Tech Skills Compact by cooperating with industry, unions and training organisations to support workers entering the technology sector. The Government is also rebuilding Australia s world class science, technology, engineering and mathematics STEM capabilities and workforce. The Government will review the National Science and Research Priorities and Science Statement, and also undertake work on increasing diversity in STEM. A strong science system, with clear priorities, is critical to maintaining high levels of sustainable economic and social prosperity. This includes 10.0 million to extend Questacon s Education Outreach, which ensures young Australians, families and teachers living in diverse, remote and regional communities can continue to access high quality STEM resources. Increasing the number of positive STEM experiences for young Australians and making STEM education and employment pathways visible supports the future development of a strong STEM skilled workforce. 10.3 million to host the International Science Council Regional Presence for Asia and the Pacific. Hosting the regional office positions Australia to actively contribute and collaborate on science objectives within our region and showcase our world class science and scientists to encourage the next generation to join our STEM workforce. 5.8 million to support diversity in STEM, including Funding to undertake an independent review of the effectiveness of existing government programs that encourage participation of women in STEM. This will help ensure that government investments are directed at engaging and supporting diverse cohorts in STEM, including those currently underrepresented. Providing funding for additional community and industry led projects in the oversubscribed Women in STEM and Entrepreneurship program, and support   Portfolio Budget Statements Page 18 Department of Industry, Science and Resources the Women in STEM Ambassador to undertake research and analysis contributing to the Government s Pathway to Diversity in STEM Review. Embedding science in policy development and decision making by supporting the National Science and Technology Council to provide science and technology advice to government, and the continued delivery of the annual Prime Minister s Prizes for Science awards event.  Portfolio Budget Statements Department of Industry, Science and Resources Page 19 1.2 Entity resource statement Table 1.1 shows the total funding from all sources available to the entity for its operations and to deliver programs and services on behalf of the Government. The table summarises how resources will be applied by outcome government strategic policy objectives and by administered on behalf of the Government or the public and departmental for the entity s operations classification. For more detailed information on special accounts and special appropriations, please refer to October Budget Paper No. 4 Agency Resourcing. Information in this table is presented on a resourcing that is, appropriations cash available basis, whilst the Budgeted expenses for Outcome X tables in Section 2 and the financial statements in Section 3 are presented on an accrual basis. Table 1.1 Department of Industry, Science and Resources resource statement Budget estimates for 2022 23 as at October Budget 2022 2021 22 2022 23 Estimated Estimate actual 000 000 Departmental Annual appropriations ordinary annual services a b Prior year appropriations available 94,489 112,942 Departmental appropriation c d 644,401 597,752 s74 external revenue e 116,532 90,539 Departmental capital budget f 27,432 26,147 Annual appropriations other services non operating b Prior year appropriation available 13,010 28,843 Equity injection g 36,328 35,199 Total departmental annual appropriations 932,192 891,422 Special accounts h Opening balance 26,816 11,120 Appropriation receipts 9,426 4,000 Non appropriation receipts 17,084 6,327 Total special accounts 53,326 21,447 less departmental appropriations drawn from annual appropriations and credited to special accounts 9,426 4,000 Total departmental resourcing 976,092 908,869   Portfolio Budget Statements Page 20 Department of Industry, Science and Resources Table 1.1 Department of Industry, Science and Resources resource statement Budget estimates for 2022 23 as at October Budget 2022 continued 2021 22 2022 23 Estimated Estimate actual 000 000 Administered Annual appropriations ordinary annual services a b Prior year appropriations available 311,111 811,999 Outcome 1 1,631,602 2,188,663 Outcome 2 d 215,556 Outcome 3 d 296,203 Payments to corporate entities i 1,404,643 1,289,273 Annual appropriations other services non operating b g Prior year appropriation available 367,579 7,157 Administered assets and liabilities 848,920 7,851 Payments to corporate entities i 55,652 131,272 Total administered annual appropriations 5,131,266 4,436,215 Total administered special appropriations j 342,588 44,550 Special accounts h Opening balance 5,724,108 552,964 Appropriation receipts 615 2,945 Non appropriated receipts 20,576 24,954 Total special accounts receipts 5,745,299 580,863 less payments to corporate entities from annual special appropriations and special accounts 2,405,335 1,461,915 less administered appropriations drawn from annual special appropriations and credited to special accounts 615 2,945 less special account balances for corporate entities 4,574,000 Total administered resourcing 4,239,203 3,596,768 Total resourcing for the Department of Industry, Science and Resources 5,215,295 4,505,637 2021 22 2022 23 Average staffing levels number 3,163 2,973  Portfolio Budget Statements Department of Industry, Science and Resources Page 21 Table 1.1 Department of Industry, Science and Resources resource statement Budget estimates for 2022 23 as at October Budget 2022 continued Third party payments from and on behalf of other entities 2021 22 2022 23 Estimated Estimate actual 000 000 Payments made to corporate entities within the Portfolio i Ordinary annual services Australian Institute of Marine Science 45,548 Australian Nuclear Science and Technology Organisation 279,506 289,027 Australian Renewable Energy Agency 117,173 Clean Energy Finance Corporation 7,139 Commonwealth Scientific and Industrial Research Organisation 949,037 991,134 National Offshore Petroleum Safety and Environmental Management Authority 1,500 9,112 Northern Australia Infrastructure Facility 4,740 Total ordinary annual services 1,404,643 1,289,273 Other services Australian Nuclear Science and Technology Organisation 50,187 45,744 Commonwealth Scientific and Industrial Research Organisation 4,000 85,528 National Offshore Petroleum Safety and Environmental Management Authority 1,465 Total other services 55,652 131,272 Special appropriations Australian Renewable Energy Agency 304,836 National Offshore Petroleum Safety and Environmental Management Authority 40,204 41,370 Total special appropriations 345,040 41,370 Special accounts Clean Energy Finance Corporation 600,000 Total special accounts 600,000 Total payments to corporate entities within the Portfolio 2,405,335 1,461,915 All figures shown above are GST exclusive these may not match figures in the cash flow statement. Prepared on a resourcing i.e. appropriations available basis. a Appropriation Bill No.1 2022 23, Supply Bill No. 3 2022 23 and Supply Act No. 1 2022 23. b Excludes 110.3 million subject to administrative quarantine by Finance or withheld under section 51 of the Public Governance, Performance and Accountability Act 2013 PGPA Act . c Excludes departmental capital budget DCB . d Under a section 75 determination the department transferred appropriations for the Climate Change and Energy functions to the Department of Climate Change, Energy, the Environment and Water as at 1 July 2022. Refer to the Climate Change, Energy, the Environment and Water October PB Statements for the 2022 23 and forward year Estimates for these functions. e Estimated external revenue receipts under section 74 of the PGPA Act. f Departmental capital budgets are not separately identified in Appropriation Bill No.1 and form part of ordinary annual services items. Please refer to Table 3.5 for further details. For accounting purposes, this amount has been designated as a contribution by owner . g Appropriation Bill No.2 2022 23, Supply Bill No. 4 2022 23 and Supply Act No. 2 2022 23. h Excludes trust moneys held in special accounts. For further information on special accounts, please refer to October Budget Paper No. 4 Agency Resourcing. Please also see Table 2.1 for further information on outcome and program expenses broken down by various funding sources, e.g. annual appropriations, special appropriations and special accounts. i Corporate entities are corporate Commonwealth entities as defined under the PGPA Act. Northern Australia Infrastructure Facility is now in the Infrastructure, Transport, Regional Development, Communications and the Arts Portfolio. The Australian Institute of Marine Science, the Australian Renewable Energy Agency and the Clean Energy Finance Corporation are now in the Climate Change, Energy, the Environment and Water Portfolio. j For further information on special appropriations, please refer to October Budget Paper No. 4 Agency Resourcing.   Portfolio Budget Statements Page 22 Department of Industry, Science and Resources 1.3 Budget measures Budget measures in Part 1 relating to the Department of Industry, Science and Resources are detailed in October Budget Paper No. 2 Budget Measures and are summarised below. Table 1.2 Entity 2022 23 October Budget measures Part 1 Measures announced since the 2022 23 March Budget Program 2021 22 000 2022 23 000 2023 24 000 2024 25 000 2025 26 000 Receipt measures National Reconstruction Fund establishment 1.2 Administered receipt Departmental receipt Total Total receipt measures Administered Departmental Total Payment measures An Ambitious and Enduring APS Reform Plan a 1.1, 1.2, 1.3 Administered payment Departmental payment 206 467 524 Total 206 467 524 Buy Australian Plan b 1.2 Administered payment Departmental payment Total Government Spending Audit Foreign Affairs and Trade efficiencies c 1.1, 1.2, 1.3 Administered payment 4,136 1,336 836 1,596 Departmental payment 1,135 1,203 2,465 2,138 Total 5,271 2,539 3,301 3,734 Government Spending Audit Industry and Science Portfolio efficiencies 1.2 Administered payment 161,925 192,500 77,000 71,700 Departmental payment 2,396 330 530 Total 164,321 192,830 77,530 71,700 National Reconstruction Fund establishment 1.2 Administered payment Departmental payment 9,016 34,541 Total 9,016 34,541  Portfolio Budget Statements Department of Industry, Science and Resources Page 23 Table 1.2 Entity 2022 23 October Budget measures continued Program 2021 22 000 2022 23 000 2023 24 000 2024 25 000 2025 26 000 Savings from External Labour, and Savings from Advertising, Travel and Legal Expenses d 1.1, 1.2, 1.3 Administered payment Departmental payment 12,457 Total 12,457 Supporting Australia s Resources e 1.3 Administered payment nfp nfp nfp nfp Departmental payment nfp nfp nfp nfp Total nfp nfp nfp nfp Supporting Australian Industry 1.2 Administered payment 51,056 40,984 23,600 1,000 Departmental payment 3,200 5,424 3,952 3,914 Total 54,256 46,408 27,552 4,914 Supporting Talent and Leadership in Australian Science and Technology 1.1, 1.2 Administered payment 4,207 2,934 2,794 2,625 Departmental payment 5,127 8,787 6,477 3,987 Total 9,334 11,721 9,271 6,612 Supporting the Supply of Australian Gas 1.3 Administered payment Departmental payment 2,055 2,898 2,932 2,958 Total 2,055 2,898 2,932 2,958 Total payment measures Administered 110,798 149,918 51,442 69,671 Departmental 3,204 49,650 9,842 8,721 Total 107,594 100,268 41,600 60,950 Prepared on a Government Finance Statistics Underlying Cash basis. Figures displayed as a negative represent a decrease in funds and a positive represent an increase in funds. The nature of the measure is such that a reliable estimate cannot be provided. a The lead entity for the measure An Ambitious and Enduring APS Reform Plan is the Department of the Prime Minister and Cabinet. The full measure description and package details appear in October Budget Paper No. 2 Budget Measures under the Prime Minister and Cabinet Portfolio. b This measure is to be met from existing resources. c The lead entity for the measure Government Spending Audit Foreign Affairs and Trade efficiencies is the Department of Foreign Affairs and Trade. The full measure description and package details appear in October Budget Paper No. 2 Budget Measures under the Foreign Affairs and Trade Portfolio. d The measure Savings from External Labour, and Savings from Advertising, Travel and Legal Expenses is part of a Cross Portfolio measure. The full measure description and package details appear in October Budget Paper No. 2 Budget Measures under Cross Portfolio. e The financial impact for this measure is not for publication nfp due to commercial sensitivities.   Portfolio Budget Statements Page 24 Department of Industry, Science and Resources Section 2 Outcomes and planned performance Government outcomes are the intended results, impacts or consequences of actions by the Government on the Australian community. Commonwealth programs are the primary vehicle by which government entities achieve the intended results of their outcome statements. Entities are required to identify the programs which contribute to government outcomes over the Budget and forward years. Each outcome is described below together with its related programs. The following provides detailed information on expenses for each outcome and program, further broken down by funding source. Note Performance reporting requirements in the Portfolio Budget Statements are part of the Commonwealth performance framework established by the Public Governance, Performance and Accountability Act 2013. It is anticipated that the performance measure described in Portfolio Budget Statements will be read with broader information provided in an entity s corporate plans and annual performance statements included in annual reports to provide a complete picture of an entity s planned and actual performance. The most recent corporate plan for the Department of Industry, Science and Resources can be found at The most recent annual performance statement can be found at  Portfolio Budget Statements Department of Industry, Science and Resources Page 25 2.1 Budgeted expenses and performance for Outcome 1 Outcome 1 Support economic growth, productivity and job creation for all Australians by investing in science, technology and commercialisation, growing innovative and competitive businesses, industries and regions, and supporting resources Linked programs Portfolio agencies Australian Nuclear Science and Technology Organisation Commonwealth Scientific and Industrial Research Organisation Geoscience Australia IP Australia National Offshore Petroleum Safety and Environmental Management Authority Programs Australian Nuclear Science and Technology Organisation Program 1 Science and Technology Solutions Commonwealth Scientific and Industrial Research Organisation Program 1 Scientific and Industrial Research and Infrastructure Geoscience Australia Program 1 Geoscientific and Spatial Information Services IP Australia Program 1 IP Rights Administration and Professional Registration Program 2 Education and Awareness Program 3 Advice to Government and International Engagement National Offshore Petroleum Safety and Environmental Management Authority Program 1 Regulatory oversight of Safety Cases, Well Operations Management Plans and Environment Plans coupled with effective monitoring, investigation and enforcement Contribution to Outcome 1 made by linked programs The portfolio agencies programs contribute to supporting economic growth, productivity and job creation for all Australians by investing in science, technology and commercialisation, growing innovative and competitive businesses, industries and regions, and supporting resources. Further information on the linked programs is available in the agencies chapters. Australian Competition and Consumer Commission Program Program 1.1 Australian Competition and Consumer Commission Contribution to Outcome 1 made by linked program   Portfolio Budget Statements Page 26 Department of Industry, Science and Resources The Australian Competition and Consumer Commission promotes competition, fair trading, protection of consumers rights and product safety for the benefit of consumers, businesses and the Australian community. The primary responsibilities of the Australian Competition and Consumer Commission are to enforce compliance with the competition, consumer protection, fair trading and product safety provisions of the Competition and Consumer Act 2010, regulate national infrastructure and undertake market studies. The department works collaboratively with the Australian Competition and Consumer Commission given competitive markets contribute to supporting economic growth, productivity, innovation and competitive businesses and industries. Australian Federal Police Program Program 1.1 Federal Policing Investigations Contribution to Outcome 1 made by linked program Through the National Measurement Institute, the department provides illicit drug analysis and drug profiling services to the Australian Federal Police. Australian Taxation Office Programs Program 1.1 Australian Taxation Office Program 1.7 Fuel Tax Credit Scheme Program 1.10 Research and Development Tax Incentive Contribution to Outcome 1 made by linked programs The Australian Taxation Office works collaboratively with the department on a number of industry programs delivered through the tax system. These include the Research and Development R D Tax Incentive, tax incentives for early stage investors, the Fuel Tax Credit Scheme, the Early Stage Venture Capital Limited Partnerships tax concessions, Venture Capital Limited Partnerships tax concessions, Pooled Development Funds tax concessions and Junior Minerals Exploration Incentive. Australian Trade and Investment Commission Program Program 1.1 Promotion of Australia s export and other international economic interests Contribution to Outcome 1 made by linked program The Australian Trade and Investment Commission Austrade promotes Australia s exports and other international economic interests by providing information, advice and services to businesses, associations, institutions and government. The department cooperates with Austrade to build global networks, develop resilient supply chains and identify and capitalise on opportunities in priority areas, such as critical technologies and manufacturing. Austrade also cooperates with the department, through the Australian Space Agency, to grow the Australian space industry.  Portfolio Budget Statements Department of Industry, Science and Resources Page 27 Austrade works closely with the department s Critical Minerals Office to provide trade facilitation services and maximise commercial opportunities in key markets for Australian critical minerals projects. Bureau of Meteorology Program Program 1.1 Bureau of Meteorology Contribution to Outcome 1 made by linked program The Bureau of Meteorology works collaboratively with the department, through the Australian Space Agency, to provide expertise in space weather and Earth observations to help build Australia s Earth observation from space capabilities. In November 2021, the Australian Space Agency launched the Earth Observation from Space Roadmap, a 10 year plan to support growth of the Australian Earth Observation from space ecosystem. The Bureau of Meteorology contributes to the delivery of this roadmap by leading selected activities related to meteorological capabilities. Clean Energy Finance Corporation Program Program 1.1 Clean Energy Finance Corporation Contribution to Outcome 1 made by linked program The Clean Energy Finance Corporation facilitates increased flows of finance into the clean energy sector. The department works collaboratively with the Clean Energy Finance Corporation to support research and commercialisation and build industry capacity in the clean energy sector. The Clean Energy Finance Corporation, alongside the Northern Australia Infrastructure Facility and Export Finance Australia, is active in working to grow Australia s critical minerals sector through catalytic financing. Department of Agriculture, Fisheries and Forestry Programs Program 1.10 Agricultural Resources Program 2.1 Biosecurity and Export Services Contribution to Outcome 1 made by linked programs The department works collaboratively with the Department of Agriculture, Fisheries and Forestry on food industry and technology development, and critical supply chain disruptions in the agricultural sector. This collaboration also supports manufacturers in the food agriculture, forestry, fisheries, and food and fibre sectors. The department also provides laboratory services and expertise, through the National Measurement Institute, to support the Department of Agriculture, Fisheries and Forestry s National Residue Survey and Imported Food Inspection Scheme.   Portfolio Budget Statements Page 28 Department of Industry, Science and Resources Department of Climate Change, Energy, the Environment and Water Programs Program 1.1 Reducing Australia s greenhouse gas emissions Program 1.2 Developing clean energy technology Program 1.3 Supporting reliable, secure and affordable energy Program 2.1 Sustainable Management of Natural Resources and the Environment Program 2.3 Commonwealth Environmental Water Program 3.1 Antarctica Science, Policy and Presence Contribution to Outcome 1 made by linked programs The Department of Climate Change, Energy, the Environment and Water works collaboratively with the department on the Australian Antarctic Science Council and provides advice to ensure the ongoing protection of the Alligator Rivers Region from impacts of mining uranium at Ranger Mine. Through the National Measurement Institute, the Department of Climate Change, Energy, the Environment and Water and its stakeholders access expertise and laboratory solutions to support their objectives. The department works collaboratively with the Department of Climate Change, Energy, the Environment and Water to help industry transition to net zero emissions to support manufacturers in renewables and low emission technologies, including through developing Australia s critical minerals industry, which will underpin production of many clean energy technologies and to help mitigate critical supply chain disruptions, including in the water and energy sectors. Department of Defence Programs Program 2.1 Strategy, Policy and Industry Program 2.9 Capability, Acquisition and Sustainment Program 2.13 Defence Science and Technology Program 2.14 Defence Intelligence Contribution to Outcome 1 made by linked programs The department works collaboratively with the Department of Defence on Australia s Defence Projects that support job creation and economic growth. The Projects include a focus on the Naval Shipbuilding and Sustainment Enterprise including supporting the Nuclear Powered Submarine Taskforce, the Australian Industry Capability Program and the Guided Weapons and Explosive Ordnance Enterprise, as well as the linkages between defence industry policy and broader industry policy. The department also focuses on maximising opportunities for Australian industry involvement in Defence procurement and building scale and resilience in defence manufacturing.  Portfolio Budget Statements Department of Industry, Science and Resources Page 29 The Defence Innovation Hub awards contracts to support Australian defence industry particularly small and medium enterprises to develop innovative technology that can be commercialised and acquired by the Australian Defence Force. The program also supports jobs across industry including jobs in science, technology, engineering and mathematics STEM . The department works collaboratively with the Department of Defence on ensuring a complementary approach between civil space industry development and activity and Defence s space responsibilities and interests. Collaboration has included the development of technical roadmaps, published by the Australian Space Agency, to highlight opportunities for future space capability growth in Australia. The department works collaboratively with the Department of Defence and South Australian Government to support coexistence arrangements in the Woomera Prohibited Area WPA . The coexistence arrangements balance national security and economic benefits of the area, as well as support Aboriginal cultural activities. The Deputy Secretary with responsibility for Resources is an ex officio member of the WPA Advisory Board, the primary governance body for the WPA coexistence framework. Department of Education Program Program 2.6 Research capacity Contribution to Outcome 1 made by linked program The department is working with the Department of Education to enhance Australia s research capacity through the national research infrastructure. The department is also working with the Department of Education to increase Australian university research commercialisation outcomes including a higher education research commercialisation intellectual property framework, the establishment of Australia s Economic Accelerator program and Industry workforce mobility programs, and the establishment of the Start up Year Entrepreneur program. The Department of Education works collaboratively with the department to create policies that help Australians participate in education, supporting research and innovation activities, and helping meet employer needs for highly skilled workers. This includes building capability in priority areas. Department of Employment and Workplace Relations Program Program 1.1 Employment Services Contribution to Outcome 1 made by linked program The Department of Employment and Workplace Relations works collaboratively with the department to create policies that help Australians participate in training and the workforce and meet employer and industry needs. This includes building capability in priority areas and working with the department to take forward the Digital and Tech Skills Compact, one of the immediate outcomes of the Jobs and Skills Summit.   Portfolio Budget Statements Page 30 Department of Industry, Science and Resources Department of Finance Program Program 2.5 Technology and Procurement Contribution to Outcome 1 made by linked program The department is supporting the establishment of the Future Made in Australia Office the Office in the Department of Finance, which is the first step in the 10 point Buy Australian Plan the Plan . The department will collaborate with the Office in the delivery of the Plan, including supporting the Deputy Secretary Steering Committee and the Ministerial Roundtable on Procurement, leading on point 7 of the Plan supporting industry sectors through the Government s purchasing power , providing support to other agencies on the implementation of parts of the Plan that intersect with industry, and supporting industry engagement to enable greater involvement in government procurement by small and medium enterprises, with a particular focus on regional and Indigenous owned businesses. Department of Foreign Affairs and Trade Program Program 1.1 Foreign Affairs and Trade Operations Contribution to Outcome 1 made by linked program The department works closely with the Department of Foreign Affairs and Trade on a wide range of foreign and trade policy objectives. It supports free trade agreement negotiations by representing the interests of Australian industry, and supports other foreign policy objectives across a broad range of international and multilateral settings. The department works closely with the Department of Foreign Affairs and Trade to build Australia s influence and engagement at a bilateral level with key partners objectives supported by the department s network of overseas posted officers. The Department of Foreign Affairs and Trade works collaboratively with the department to enable science diplomacy, support the Global Science and Technology Diplomacy Fund, and advance Australia s trade and investment interests, including supporting the Global Resources Strategy and positioning Australia to remain a stable and reliable energy supplier to regional partners, providing the energy needed to meet global emissions reduction goals. The department works collaboratively with the Department of Foreign Affairs and Trade to support Australian manufacturers to grow exports, attract foreign investment, and build resilience in supply chains through international engagement. It also works with the Department of Foreign Affairs and Trade and Export Finance Australia on implementing the Critical Minerals Strategy, including through Export Finance Australia s 2 billion Critical Minerals Facility. The Department of Foreign Affairs and Trade and Austrade also work with the department in support of opening doors internationally for the Australian space sector, and advocating for the responsible use of outer space, in line with Australia s international obligations.  Portfolio Budget Statements Department of Industry, Science and Resources Page 31 Department of Health and Aged Care Program Program 1.1 Health Research, Coordination and Access Contribution to Outcome 1 made by linked program The Department of Health and Aged Care works collaboratively with the department to implement the Biomedical Translation Fund and the Medical Research Future Fund. The department provides input to a range of health policies to improve the support and regulatory environment for innovation by the health sector. Through the National Measurement Institute, the department contributes to reducing smoking prevalence in Australia by conducting tobacco plain packaging compliance and enforcement activities. The department works with the Department of Health and Aged Care to support manufacturers of medical products and the industry and business response to COVID 19 impacts in particular to establish and implement an onshore sovereign mRNA vaccine manufacturing capability. The department also works with the Department of Health and Aged Care on supply chain disruptions in the health sector that require domestic industry considerations. Department of Home Affairs Programs Program 2.1 Migration Program 3.1 Trade Facilitation and Industry Engagement Program 3.3 Border Revenue Program 3.4 Border Enforcement Contribution to Outcome 1 made by linked programs The Department of Home Affairs contributes to Australia s anti dumping system, in coordination with the Anti Dumping Commission in the department, and provision of tariff and duty credits and concessions. The Department of Home Affairs works collaboratively with the department on the Significant Investor Visa Complying Investment Framework that encourages the expansion of Australia s venture capital fund capacity, attracting investment in innovative early stage companies, particularly from new sources of foreign investment. The department will continue to work with the Department of Home Affairs regarding employer sponsored permanent skilled migration. The department also works with the Department of Home Affairs to monitor and manage supply chain disruptions in the critical infrastructure sector. Through the National Management Institute, the department provides forensic drug testing services and research to support the Australian Border Force.   Portfolio Budget Statements Page 32 Department of Industry, Science and Resources Department of Infrastructure, Transport, Regional Development, Communications and the Arts Programs Program 1.1 Infrastructure Investment Program 3.1 Regional Development Contribution to Outcome 1 made by linked programs The Department of Infrastructure, Transport, Regional Development, Communications and the Arts is working with the department to support economic activity, improve innovation and create long term sustainable jobs in Australia s regions, including Northern Australia, Regional Cooperative Research Centres Projects grants, support for space sector investment linked to City Deals and a range of regional grants programs. The department delivers the Northern Australia Development Program for the Department of Infrastructure, Transport, Regional Development, Communications and the Arts under the Northern Australia Development Program. The department also works with the Department of Infrastructure, Transport, Regional Development, Communications and the Arts to monitor and manage critical supply chain disruptions in the freight and transport sector. The department will collaborate with the Department of Infrastructure, Transport, Regional Development, Communications and the Arts on developing the Government s National Rail Manufacturing Plan and the National Reconstruction Fund. Department of the Treasury Programs Program 1.1 Department of the Treasury Program 1.4 General Revenue Assistance Program 1.9 National Partnership Payments to the States Contribution to Outcome 1 made by linked programs The Department of the Treasury Treasury shares policy responsibility in respect of incentives and concessions delivered through the tax system, including the Research and Development R D Tax Incentive, the Early Stage Venture Capital Limited Partnerships tax concessions, Venture Capital Limited Partnerships tax concessions, Pooled Development Funds tax concessions and tax incentives for early stage investors angel investors . The Treasury continues to work with the department on royalty payments collected from the North West Shelf Oil and Gas Project. A range of National Partnership payments are made to the states, including the environmental management of the former Rum Jungle mine site in the Northern Territory. The Treasury also administers Australia s foreign investment framework. The framework is a key regulatory control relevant to foreign investment in the resources sector and the critical minerals industry, and supports economic growth, productivity and job creation by facilitating foreign investment that is in Australia s national interest.  Portfolio Budget Statements Department of Industry, Science and Resources Page 33 National Indigenous Australians Agency Program Program 1.1 Jobs, Land and the Economy Contribution to Outcome 1 made by linked program The National Indigenous Australians Agency is implementing initiatives that enable Indigenous Australians to benefit economically from their land. The department has been consulting with the National Indigenous Australians Agency to support its efforts to establish an Indigenous Business and Employment Hub in the Northern Territory the Hub . The department is working with the National Indigenous Australians Agency to ensure the operations of the Hub encourage greater access by First Nations business owners to mainstream business support offerings. The department is working with the National Indigenous Australians Agency and the Northern Territory Government to maximise opportunities for First Nations people and businesses to participate in the Rum Jungle Rehabilitation Project. The National Indigenous Australians Agency is also engaged in discussions on how the successful execution of this significant rehabilitation project will enable the transfer of land to its Kungarakan and Warai Traditional Owners. The department and the National Indigenous Australians Agency have also been engaging on to a whole of government approach to negotiations for a new or amended land access agreement under the Aboriginal Land Rights Northern Territory Act 1976 to facilitate the ongoing rehabilitations of the Ranger Uranium Mine. The department has also engaged with the National Indigenous Australian Agency to ensure the Indigenous Land Use Agreement negotiations for the Square Kilometre Array Project, and benefits that flow from this agreement, are consistent with Indigenous affairs policy and whole of government priorities. The department will continue to work cooperatively to identify and enable opportunities for Indigenous Australians across industry, including manufacturing, science, and resources. National Emergency Management Agency Program Program 1.1 National Emergency Management Agency Departmental Outcome 1 Contribution to Outcome 1 made by linked program The National Emergency Management Agency provides input to the department to guide the delivery of the Strengthening Business Program that assists Australian business in addressing challenges arising from natural disasters. Sport Integrity Australia Program Program 1.1 Sports Integrity Contribution to Outcome 1 made by linked program   Portfolio Budget Statements Page 34 Department of Industry, Science and Resources Through the National Measurement Institute, the department provides analytical services and research to support Sport Integrity Australia s anti doping program.  Portfolio Budget Statements Department of Industry, Science and Resources Page 35 Budgeted expenses for Outcome 1 This table shows how much the entity intends to spend on an accrual basis on achieving the outcome, broken down by program, as well as by administered and departmental funding sources. Table 2.1.1 Budgeted expenses for Outcome 1 2021 22 2022 23 2023 24 2024 25 2025 26 Estimated Budget Forward Forward Forward actual estimate estimate estimate 000 000 000 000 000 Program 1.1 Investing in science, technology and commercialisation Administered expenses Ordinary annual services Appropriation Bill No. 1 381,904 446,745 382,201 336,888 338,739 Administered Total 381,904 446,745 382,201 336,888 338,739 Departmental expenses Departmental appropriation 169,612 200,255 183,169 154,696 147,380 s74 external revenue a 51,921 69,559 59,293 60,007 58,582 Special accounts 1,408 2,024 24 Expenses not requiring appropriation in the Budget year b 17,134 15,937 11,775 11,542 11,542 Departmental Total 240,075 287,775 254,261 226,245 217,504 Total expenses for Program 1.1 621,979 734,520 636,462 563,133 556,243 Program 1.2 Growing innovative and competitive businesses, industries and regions Administered expenses Ordinary annual services Appropriation Bill No. 1 418,822 1,257,311 671,552 181,405 101,258 Special accounts 5,282 Administered Total 418,822 1,262,593 671,552 181,405 101,258 Departmental expenses Departmental appropriation 206,368 300,212 275,501 246,697 240,362 s74 external revenue a 60,930 22,301 12,763 7,919 3,667 Special accounts 6,247 6,712 5,412 5,412 5,412 Expenses not requiring appropriation in the Budget year b 20,751 19,302 14,260 13,978 13,978 Departmental Total 294,296 348,527 307,936 274,006 263,419 Total expenses for Program 1.2 713,118 1,611,120 979,488 455,411 364,677   Portfolio Budget Statements Page 36 Department of Industry, Science and Resources Table 2.1.1 Budgeted expenses for Outcome 1 continued 2021 22 2022 23 2023 24 2024 25 2025 26 Estimated Budget Forward Forward Forward actual estimate estimate estimate 000 000 000 000 000 Program 1.3 Supporting a strong resources sector Administered expenses Ordinary annual services Appropriation Bill No. 1 154,388 141,650 92,438 27,288 5,573 Special accounts 14,504 18,049 18,798 17,354 17,836 Special appropriations 60 60 60 60 Expenses not requiring appropriation in the Budget year c 1,462,721 42,328 8,163 14,624 16,718 Administered Total 1,631,613 202,087 119,459 59,326 40,187 Departmental expenses Departmental appropriation 59,384 78,873 70,356 62,295 59,758 s74 external revenue a 370 Expenses not requiring appropriation in the Budget year b 4,972 4,624 3,416 3,349 3,349 Departmental Total 64,726 83,497 73,772 65,644 63,107 Total expenses for Program 1.3 1,696,339 285,584 193,231 124,970 103,294 Outcome 1 Totals by appropriation type Administered expenses Ordinary annual services Appropriation Bill No. 1 2,235,445 3,134,979 2,460,560 1,748,037 1,668,638 Less payments to corporate entities 1,280,331 1,289,273 1,314,369 1,202,456 1,223,068 Special accounts 14,504 23,331 18,798 17,354 17,836 Special appropriations 40,204 41,430 39,834 39,017 39,387 Less payments to corporate entities 40,204 41,370 39,774 38,957 39,327 Expenses not requiring appropriation in the Budget year c 1,462,706 42,328 8,163 14,624 16,718 Payments to corporate entities 1,320,535 1,330,643 1,354,143 1,241,413 1,262,395 Administered Total 3,752,859 3,242,068 2,527,355 1,819,032 1,742,579 Departmental expenses Departmental appropriation 435,364 579,340 529,026 463,688 447,500 s74 external revenue a 113,221 91,860 72,056 67,926 62,249 Special accounts 7,655 8,736 5,436 5,412 5,412 Expenses not requiring appropriation in the Budget year b 42,857 39,863 29,451 28,869 28,869 Departmental Total 599,097 719,799 635,969 565,895 544,030 Total expenses for Outcome 1 4,351,956 3,961,867 3,163,324 2,384,927 2,286,609  Portfolio Budget Statements Department of Industry, Science and Resources Page 37 Table 2.1.1 Budgeted expenses for Outcome 1 continued 2021 22 2022 23 2023 24 2024 25 2025 26 Estimated Budget Forward Forward Forward actual estimate estimate estimate 000 000 000 000 000 Movement of administered funds between years d Outcome 1 Program 1.1 Business Research and Innovation Initiative 5,174 410 4,764 Global Science and Technology Diplomacy Fund 3,058 3,058 National Carp Control Plan e 1,839 1,839 Square Kilometre Array Radio Telescope Program 31,290 31,290 Program 1.2 Delivering Cyber Security Skills for a Digital Economy 21,430 20,159 1,270 Ferretti International Upgrade 10,000 10,000 Manufacturing Modernisation Fund 14,364 12,324 2,041 Modern Manufacturing Initiative 330,517 330,517 Space Infrastructure Fund 1,100 1,100 Supply Chain Resilience Initiative 8,817 14,117 5,300 Thermochemical Conversion Technology Trial Facility 5,013 5,013 Program 1.3 Advancing Research and Development for Critical Minerals 422 422 Critical Minerals Support for Supply Chains 2,000 2,000 Maralinga Site Remediation f nfp nfp nfp nfp Offshore Electricity Registrar 550 550 Radioactive Waste Management 6,177 6,177 Resources and METS Industry Market Access Program 1,000 1,000 Strategic Basins Plan 5,900 5,900 Total movement of administered funds 448,651 421,778 24,603 1,270 1,000 2021 22 2022 23 Average staffing level number 2,704 2,973 a Estimated expenses incurred in relation to receipts retained under section 74 of the PGPA Act. b Expenses not requiring appropriation in the Budget year are made up of depreciation amortisation expenses, audit fees, and approved operating losses. c Expenses not requiring appropriation relate to expenses for restoration provisions associated with Ranger Rehabilitation, the upfront recognition of expenses for the Long Term Handling of the Northern Endeavour, timing differences associated with the Support for Ukraine program, and depreciation and amortisation expenses for the National Offshore Petroleum Titles Administrator. d Figures displayed as a negative represent a decrease in funds and a positive represent an increase in funds. e This program transferred to the Department of Agriculture, Fisheries and Forestry from 2022 23 onwards. f The financial impact is not for publication nfp due to commercial in confidence considerations. Note Departmental appropriation splits and totals are indicative estimates and may change in the course of the budget year as government priorities change.   Portfolio Budget Statements Page 38 Department of Industry, Science and Resources Table 2.1.2 Program components of Outcome 1 2021 22 2022 23 2023 24 2024 25 2025 26 Estimated Budget Forward Forward Forward actual estimate estimate estimate 000 000 000 000 000 Program 1.1 Investing in science, technology and commercialisation Annual administered expenses Access to World leading Astronomy Infrastructure 13,120 12,924 13,181 18,445 13,715 Antarctic Science Collaboration Initiative 5,000 5,000 5,000 5,000 5,000 Australian Quantum Ecosystem a nfp Boosting Female Founders Initiative 9,496 13,268 12,202 5,900 Building a World class Onshore MRNA Ecosystem 658 1,500 Business Research and Innovation Initiative 10,848 6,285 10,794 484 7,038 Cooperative Research Centres Program 187,343 199,374 199,962 205,054 201,579 COVID 19 Response Package PPE Material 4 Digital Productivity 1,500 1,500 1,500 1,500 1,500 Enhancing Australia s Science and Research Leadership in the Asia Pacific 1,989 1,939 1,996 2,025 Global Science and Technology Diplomacy Fund 16,504 18,449 14,400 10,840 10,840 Innovation Investment Fund Committee 83 147 155 163 171 Inspiring All Australians in STEM 12,708 22,166 25,780 24,822 21,709 National Carp Control Plan b National Quantum Strategy 7,012 7,012 7,012 7,012 National Research Centre for Disaster Resilience 8,000 8,000 8,000 9,000 9,000 Patent Box for Low Emissions Technology c 1,000 1,000 1,000 1,000 Research and Development Tax Incentive 1,815 5,700 5,700 5,700 5,700 Square Kilometre Array Radio Telescope Project 114,825 140,318 74,580 38,976 51,952 Support for Quantum Researchers and Academic Partnerships 2,113 996 996 498 Total annual administered expenses 381,904 446,745 382,201 336,888 338,739 Total expenses for Program 1.1 381,904 446,745 382,201 336,888 338,739  Portfolio Budget Statements Department of Industry, Science and Resources Page 39 Table 2.1.2 Program components of Outcome 1 continued 2021 22 2022 23 2023 24 2024 25 2025 26 Estimated Budget Forward Forward Forward actual estimate estimate estimate 000 000 000 000 000 Program 1.2 Growing innovative and competitive businesses, industries and regions Annual administered expenses ACE EV Group Advanced Manufacturing Facility and Vehicle to the Grid Trial d 1,500 Advanced Manufacturing Growth Fund e Artificial Intelligence Action Plan 7,176 40,568 42,338 22,304 8,104 Artificial Intelligence Capability Fund 212 Asialink Business 2,997 3,099 Australian Business Number and Business Names Registration System expansion 50 50 50 50 Australian Made Export Campaign 1,500 1,000 Delivering Cyber Security Skills for a Digital Economy 2,877 23,000 41,159 1,270 Diesel Exhaust Fluid Security 29,400 Digital Skills Finder Platform 1,248 Empowering Businesses to Go Digital 410 Encouraging Innovation in Advanced Manufacturing 862 Entrepreneurs Programme 117,072 127,315 88,657 63,860 65,966 Ferretti International Upgrade f 10,000 Geocoded National Address File a 6,451 6,580 6,711 nfp nfp Growing Australia s Space Industry 4,974 44,500 63,000 59,000 15,000 Industry Growth Centres Initiative 76,800 International Space Investment 7,109 6,391 6,000 6,000 5,690 Local Industry Grants 50,056 38,984 21,600 Manufacturing Modernisation Fund 33,436 25,674 2,041 Modern Manufacturing Initiative 90,383 873,267 362,740 Mossman Mill Transition Program 3,524 1,000 National Innovation Games 808   Portfolio Budget Statements Page 40 Department of Industry, Science and Resources Table 2.1.2 Program components of Outcome 1 continued 2021 22 2022 23 2023 24 2024 25 2025 26 Estimated Budget Forward Forward Forward actual estimate estimate estimate 000 000 000 000 000 Program 1.2 Growing innovative and competitive businesses, industries and regions Protecting Australia s National Interest in Critical and Emerging Technologies Standards 632 632 632 632 Securing Urea Supply for Transport and Agriculture d 6,200 SME Export Hubs 916 357 Space Infrastructure Fund 3,198 600 1,100 Supply Chain Resilience Initiative 8,583 36,367 11,560 Support for an Australian Fashion Certification Trade Mark 285 Support for Industry Service Organisations program 5,289 5,255 4,580 4,689 4,816 Support the National Space Mission for Earth Observation a nfp nfp nfp nfp Supporting Australia s Textile, Clothing and Footwear Industry 1,000 2,000 2,000 1,000 Thermochemical Conversion Technology Trial Facility 600 Using Blockchain Technology to Reduce Business Compliance Costs 5,612 Total annual administered expenses 418,822 1,257,311 671,552 181,405 101,258 Special account expenses Services for Other Entities and Trust Moneys 5,282 Total special account expenses 5,282 Total expenses for Program 1.2 418,822 1,262,593 671,552 181,405 101,258  Portfolio Budget Statements Department of Industry, Science and Resources Page 41 Table 2.1.2 Program components of Outcome 1 continued 2021 22 2022 23 2023 24 2024 25 2025 26 Estimated Budget Forward Forward Forward actual estimate estimate estimate 000 000 000 000 000 Program 1.3 Supporting a strong resources sector Annual administered expenses Advancing Research and Development for Critical Minerals 828 1,422 1,000 Australian Critical Minerals Research and Development Hub 4,275 8,065 8,065 4,275 Beetaloo Basin Drilling Program 5,401 30,000 Critical Minerals Development Program 50,880 38,763 8,915 Critical Minerals Support for Supply Chains 2,000 Fugitive Methane Technology Fund c 500 4,000 4,500 Global Mining Challenge Program 227 250 250 250 Long Term Handling of the Northern Endeavour 122,150 Maralinga Maintenance 243 253 261 256 258 Maralinga Site Remediation a 324 nfp nfp nfp nfp Offshore Electricity Infrastructure and Registrar 513 3,160 3,836 Onshore Gas Social and Economic Research Fund 4,609 2,913 2,913 Petroleum Royalties Administration 40 40 40 40 40 Positioning the Northern Land Council to deliver in the Beetaloo 1,058 543 546 Resources and METS Industry Market Access Program 1,000 1,000 1,000 1,000 Radioactive Waste Management 13,004 31,514 31,764 4,262 Rum Jungle Mine Site Environmental Rehabilitation a nfp nfp nfp nfp Shaping Australia to Capture the Global Hydrogen Opportunity d 121 Strategic Basin Plans 5,870 12,900 Total annual administered expenses 154,388 141,650 92,438 27,288 5,573   Portfolio Budget Statements Page 42 Department of Industry, Science and Resources Table 2.1.2 Program components of Outcome 1 continued 2021 22 2022 23 2023 24 2024 25 2025 26 Estimated Budget Forward Forward Forward actual estimate estimate estimate 000 000 000 000 000 Program 1.3 Supporting a strong resources sector Special appropriation Offshore Minerals Act 1994 60 60 60 60 Total special appropriation expenses 60 60 60 60 Special account expenses National Offshore Petroleum Titles Administrator 14,504 18,049 18,798 17,354 17,836 Total special account expenses 14,504 18,049 18,798 17,354 17,836 Expenses not requiring appropriation Long Term Handling of the Northern Endeavour g 898,905 National Offshore Petroleum Titles Administrator h 1,988 1,865 1,930 1,749 1,974 Ranger Rehabilitation i 561,804 7,076 6,233 12,875 14,744 Support for Ukraine j 24 33,387 Total expenses not requiring appropriation in the Budget year 1,462,721 42,328 8,163 14,624 16,718 Total expenses for Program 1.3 1,631,613 202,087 119,459 59,326 40,187 a The financial impact is not for publication nfp due to commercial in confidence considerations. b Transferred to the Department of Agriculture, Fisheries and Forestry from 2022 23 onwards. Refer to the Department of Agriculture, Fisheries and Forestry PB Statements for Budget and forward estimates. c Previously included in the 2022 23 PB Statements in Program 2.1 Reducing Australia s greenhouse gas emissions. d Transferred to the Department of Climate Change, Energy, the Environment and Water from 2022 23 onwards. Refer to the Climate Change, Energy, the Environment and Water PB Statements for Budget and forward estimates. e 1.7 million in prior year accrued expenses were reversed in 2021 22. This reversal is not shown in the table. f 10.0 million in prior year accrued expenses were reversed in 2021 22. This reversal is not shown in the table. g Relates to the upfront recognition of expenses for the Long Term Handling of the Northern Endeavour. h Relates to depreciation and amortisation expenses for the National Offshore Petroleum Titles Administrator. i Relates to expenses for restoration provisions for Ranger Rehabilitation. j Relates to timing differences between payment and expenses for Support for Ukraine.  Portfolio Budget Statements Department of Industry, Science and Resources Page 43 Table 2.1.3 Performance measure for Outcome 1 Table 2.1.3 below details the performance criteria for each program associated with Outcome 1. It identifies the related key activities as expressed in the corporate plan. Please refer to the corporate plan for further information on the key activities, including the delivery of the activities related to the program, the context in which these activities are delivered and how the performance of these measures will be measured. Where relevant, where 2022 23 October Budget measures have created new programs or materially changed existing programs, details are provided. Outcome 1 Support economic growth, productivity and job creation for all Australians by investing in science, technology and commercialisation, growing innovative and competitive businesses, industries and regions, and supporting resources Program 1.1 Investing in science, technology and commercialisation This program aims to facilitate the development and uptake of new ideas and technology and translate them into commercial outcomes and enhanced productivity. Key Activities a We will measure and report on our progress towards the following intended results of the activity Supporting and capitalising on national science expertise to drive innovation, enhance productivity and generate globally competitive solutions across the economy to improve Australia s response to COVID 19 as well as addressing national and international challenges, such as in space, cyber, health, energy, climate change, resources, agriculture, disaster management and artificial intelligence AI . Promoting the growth of a highly skilled workforce through greater understanding, awareness and participation in science, technology, engineering and mathematics STEM , particularly for women, Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander Peoples and other underrepresented groups. Supporting basic research, business research and development, commercialisation and translation of research, and access to early stage finance, and encouraging collaboration between industry and the research sector, including through Australia s world class science agencies and infrastructure. Enabling Australia s participation in world leading science, supporting access to domestic and international science facilities and deepening international science engagement to drive Australia s national interests. Maintaining trust in Australia s national system of measurement, both nationally and internationally. Year Performance measures Expected Performance Results Prior Year 2021 22 Application for registration of R D activities through the Research and Development Tax Incentive RDTI are processed within 40 business days for first time registrants. 88 20 business days for registrants that have applied within 6 months after the end of the income period. 97 80 business days for registrations submitted from 6 to 10 months after the end of the income period. 100 Result Partially met   Portfolio Budget Statements Page 44 Department of Industry, Science and Resources Prior Year 2021 22 Number of business research collaborations facilitated by departmental programs. 312 new collaborations increase of 9 . 29 new Industry Growth Centre Initiative Project Fund projects. 106 business and research organisation participants. 34 manufacturing grant recipients 32 had submitted 6 monthly reporting. 47 reported new collaborations 1,759 cumulative total 1,133 partners in CRCs. 626 partners in CRC projects . Result Met Proportion of Australians who consider STEM skills important when considering employment. Young Australians 92 Result Met Biannual surveys are conducted Youth in STEM survey. STEM influencers Teachers and Career Advisors survey. STEM influencers Parents survey . Australia s national system of measurement is trusted nationally and internationally. Trade measurement compliance activities ensured fairness for consumers and businesses when they buy or sell goods by measurement. For 2021 22, NMI visited over 3,000 businesses tested almost 6,000 measuring instruments inspected over 17,000 lines of packaged goods monitored fuel quality at 384 premises nationwide. As Australia s peak measurement body, NMI maintained third party accreditation of our measurement capabilities for quality and global acceptance under international frameworks. Result Met Year Performance measures Planned Performance Results Budget Year 2022 23 Number of businesses establishing research focused collaborations that are facilitated by portfolio programs. Develop and maintain an average of at least 1 research focused collaboration per business grant.  Portfolio Budget Statements Department of Industry, Science and Resources Page 45 Budget Year 2022 23 95 of applications for registration of research and development activities last income period through the Research and Development Tax Incentive R DTI are processed within 40 business days for first time registrants. 20 business days for registrants that have applied within 6 months after the end of the income period. 80 business days for registrations submitted from 6 to 10 months after the end of the income period. 95 companies processed within the allotted timeframes. Raising awareness of the importance of STEM through the delivery of portfolio initiatives. Proportion of Australians who consider STEM skills important when considering employment Parents 88 2022 23 and 2024 25 . Educators Teachers and career advisors 89 2022 23 and 2024 25 . Young Australians 87 2023 24 . Biannual surveys are conducted Youth in STEM survey. STEM influencers Teachers and Career Advisors survey. STEM influencers Parents survey . Number of third party accreditations maintained to ensure NMI measurement services meet national and international best practice. Maintain global acceptance of over 300 measurement capabilities under the Mutual Recognition Arrangement of the International Committee of Weights and Measures and Maintain NMI s 24 National Association of Testing Authorities NATA accreditations across calibration and testing, reference material production, and proficiency testing functions and Maintain World Anti Doping Agency WADA accreditation for NMI s sports drug testing capability. Number of measuring instruments verified for accuracy by NMI appointed inspectors and verifiers. 70,000 Forward Estimates 2023 26 Number of businesses establishing research focused collaborations that are facilitated by portfolio programs. As per 2022 23.   Portfolio Budget Statements Page 46 Department of Industry, Science and Resources Forward Estimates 2023 26 95 of applications for registration of research and development activities last income period through the Research and Development Tax Incentive R DTI are processed within 40 business days for first time registrants. 20 business days for registrants that have applied within 6 months after the end of the income period. 80 business days for registrations submitted from 6 to 10 months after the end of the income period. As per 2022 23. Raising awareness of the importance of STEM through the delivery of portfolio initiatives. As per 2022 23. Number of third party accreditations maintained to ensure NMI measurement services meet national and international best practice. As per 2022 23. Number of measuring instruments verified for accuracy by NMI appointed inspectors and verifiers. As per 2022 23. Material changes to Program 1.1 resulting from 2022 23 October Budget Measures Nil Program 1.2 Growing innovative and competitive businesses, industries and regions This program aims to support the growth of innovative and competitive businesses, industries and regions, and build a diversified, flexible, resilient and dynamic economic base that can identify and adapt to new markets and emerging opportunities. Key Activities a We will measure and report on our progress towards the following intended results of the activity Empowering Australian businesses to strengthen, grow, innovate, digitise and commercialise, supported by a competitive business environment. Developing a modern, competitive and advanced manufacturing sector, investing in areas of competitive strength to create jobs, support economic growth and improve economic resilience. Driving export growth and strengthening and diversifying supply chains and markets, attracting private sector investment and capturing new and emerging opportunities. Encouraging the adoption of critical technologies by Australian businesses to underpin productivity gains, growth, and resilience. Supporting the growth and transformation of the Australian space industry. Year Performance measures Expected Performance Results Prior year 2021 22 Investment leveraged through portfolio manufacturing initiatives. Industry Growth The Commercialisation Fund, as part of the Modern Manufacturing Strategy MMS , was a new initiative and therefore there was not a complete historical dataset. On this basis, a year on year increase was not an appropriate target. As such, the department was not able to report a result against this measure in 2021 22. Result Not able to report  Portfolio Budget Statements Department of Industry, Science and Resources Page 47 Prior Year 2021 22 Investment leveraged through portfolio manufacturing initiatives continued . Manufacturing The MMS was a new initiative and therefore there was not a complete historical dataset. On this basis, a year on year increase was not an appropriate target. As such, the department was not able to report a result against this measure in 2021 22. Result Not able to report Instances of support provided to businesses in priority sectors. The 2021 22 target was a year on year increase. 58,506 interactions with businesses, an increase of 5.79 .1 Result Met Industry growth projects and activities to date During 2021 22, 29 IGCI Project Fund Grants with 106 participants were awarded to priority sectors through the 6 Industry Growth Centres. In 2021 22, the number of activities the Industry Growth Centres organised or hosted was 308, with 25,294 individual participants. During 2021 22, the Industry Growth Centres Initiative 30 million Commercialisation Fund, which is being delivered by the Advanced Manufacturing Growth Centre, directly supported 54 collaborative projects, which included 311 businesses and research organisations. Result Not met. The target was a year on year increase. Progress towards the target naturally decreased over the year as funds were almost fully committed. 94 manufacturing grants executed increase of 291 Result Met Number of regional areas where businesses have received support. All 40 regions. Result Met The median time to complete a grant application for a merit, eligibility or competitive grant. 1.38 hours decrease of 17 . Result Met 1 This measure captures interactions with business including all applications received, agreements executed, payments made, variations executed, and project partners listed.   Portfolio Budget Statements Page 48 Department of Industry, Science and Resources Prior Year 2021 22 Proportion of anti dumping Preliminary Affirmative Determination PAD reports, or status reports explaining that there are insufficient grounds to issue a PAD, made on or before day 60 of an anti dumping countervailing investigation. 100 Result Met Total number of jobs created by the digitally intensive industries. 1,104,621 increase of 12 . Result Met Proportion of major projects that are compliant with their approved Australian Industry Participation AIP plans. 100 Result Met Year Performance measures Planned Performance Results Budget Year 2022 23 Business co investment through portfolio initiative funding. Maintain an average of at least 1.20 of business co investment for every 1 of grant funding for portfolio programs that require business co investment. Number of regional areas where businesses have received support. Year on year maintenance or increase. The median time to complete a grant application for a merit, eligibility or competitive grant. Year on year maintenance or decrease. Applicant satisfaction with the overall experience of the grants application process through the business.gov.au portal. Benchmark to be established in 2022 23, from then on the target is year on year maintenance or increase in average satisfaction score. Maintain transparency with stakeholders and the public on Anti Dumping matters. International Trade Remedies Forum meeting minutes are made publicly available within 4 weeks. Effective regulation to assure the safety of space activities. Year on year improvement in the number of open recommendations for the Australian Space Agency proportionate to the number of licenses issued. Grow the number of technology related jobs to 1.2 million by 2030. Year on year increase. Proportion of major projects that are compliant with their approved Australian Industry Participation AIP plans. 100 Forward Estimates 2023 26 Business co investment through portfolio initiative funding. As per 2022 23. Number of regional areas where businesses have received support. As per 2022 23. The median time to complete a grant application for a merit, eligibility or competitive grant. As per 2022 23. Applicant satisfaction with the overall experience of the grants application process through the business.gov.au portal. As per 2022 23.  Portfolio Budget Statements Department of Industry, Science and Resources Page 49 Forward Estimates 2023 26 Maintain transparency with stakeholders and the public on Anti Dumping matters. As per 2022 23. Effective regulation to assure the safety of space activities and the risk of damage to third party property. As per 2022 23. Progress towards goal of increasing space sector s contribution to GDP to 12 billion as per Advancing Space strategy. As per 2022 23. Inward capital investment in Australia s space industry between 2019 and 2025, including R D investment and infrastructure investment. As per 2022 23. Grow the number of technology related jobs to 1.2 million by 2030. As per 2022 23. Proportion of major projects that are compliant with their approved Australian Industry Participation AIP plans. As per 2022 23. Material changes to Program 1.2 resulting from 2022 23 October Budget Measures Nil Program 1.3 Supporting a strong resources sector This program aims to support the sustainable development of the resources sector, attract private sector investment and encourage innovative technologies. Key Activities a We will measure and report on our progress towards the following intended results of the activity Supporting investment and further exploration in the resources sector. Growing Australia s resource development potential and, in particular, growing the critical minerals sector and supporting the development of downstream supply chain capabilities. Removing regulatory and administrative barriers that impose unnecessary costs and delays to resources projects. Supporting the efficient and effective regulation of Australia s offshore petroleum sectors. Year Performance measures Expected Performance Results Prior Year 2021 22 Identify and remove regulatory and administrative barriers that impose unnecessary costs and delays to resources projects. Onshore Resources Announced 1 review and 3 measures. Result Met Offshore Resources Preliminary measures were identified to update regulations. Measures will require public consultation and or ministerial approval before finalisation. Result Partially met NOPTA s published assessment timeframes for applications made under the Offshore Petroleum and Greenhouse Storage Act 2006 OPGGSA are met 90 of the time. 93 Result Met   Portfolio Budget Statements Page 50 Department of Industry, Science and Resources Prior Year 2021 22 Total expenditure on resources exploration. The seasonally adjusted result for the 12 months from March 2021 is 1,197.4 million an increase of 24 . Result Met Annual release of offshore acreage for resources exploration investment. 1 acreage release was announced. Bidding on 2 releases closed during the year, however the outcomes were delayed. Result Partially met Grow Australia s critical minerals potential, including by supporting development of downstream capacity. The number, progress and total capital expenditure of critical minerals projects increased between 2020 and 2021. The total number of critical minerals projects in the investment pipeline increased by 13 from 61 to 69 projects . Of these, the number of committed projects increased from 5 to 12, and the number of completed projects increased from 0 to 2. Total value of the critical minerals investment pipeline not including cobalt and platinum projects increased by 25 . Result Met International engagement activities aimed at growing Australia s critical mineral sector. The Critical Minerals Facilitation Office engaged representatives of partner countries and various multilateral bodies over 2021 22. Result Met Year Performance measures Planned Performance Results Budget Year 2022 23 Safe and effective administration and operation of Australia s offshore oil, gas and GHG industry. Identify, review and implement policy reforms to improve regulatory framework for offshore oil, gas and GHG industry qualitative measure . NOPTA s published assessment timeframes for applications made under the Offshore Petroleum and Greenhouse Storage Act 2006 OPGGSA are met 90 of the time. 90 Total expenditure on resources exploration. Year on year increase. Increase opportunities for resources project investment. At least one release of acreage or award of titles for acreage for offshore resources oil and gas exploration or greenhouse gas storage exploration per year. Grow Australia s critical minerals sector, including by supporting development of downstream processing capacity. Year on year increase in the number, progress and total capital expenditure of critical minerals projects.  Portfolio Budget Statements Department of Industry, Science and Resources Page 51 Forward Estimates 2023 26 Progress strategic and or commercial international partnerships which aim to grow Australia s critical mineral sector. Year on year improvement in the quality of international partnerships. Safe and effective administration and operation of Australia s offshore oil, gas and GHG industry. As per 2022 23. NOPTA s published assessment timeframes for applications made under the Offshore Petroleum and Greenhouse Storage Act 2006 OPGGSA are met 90 of the time. As per 2022 23. Total expenditure on resources exploration. As per 2022 23. Increase opportunities for resources project investment. As per 2022 23. Grow Australia s critical minerals sector, including by supporting development of downstream processing capacity. As per 2022 23. Progress strategic and or commercial international partnerships which aim to grow Australia s critical mineral sector. As per 2022 23. Material changes to Program 1.3 resulting from 2022 23 October Budget Measures Nil a In line with the Department of Finance guidelines, the department s performance measures relate directly to its purposes and key activities, representing a mix of qualitative and quantitative measures that provide a basis for an assessment of outputs, efficiency and effectiveness over time. The department is committed to continuous improvement and any refinements to performance criteria will be reflected in the 2022 23 Corporate Plan. As a leader in national policy for complex and multi faceted areas such as the promotion of science, technology, engineering and mathematics STEM Australia s resource development potential and supporting innovative and competitive businesses, industries and regions, the department has included measures that highlight where Australia, as a nation, stands. While the department contributes significantly to these measures, there are often many other factors at play that may affect the achievement of some of these measures. However, the department believes the measures above are important to track as a means to continually develop and improve policies for the benefit of all Australians.   Portfolio Budget Statements Page 52 Department of Industry, Science and Resources 2.2 Budgeted expenses and performance for Outcome 2 Outcome 2 Reduce Australia s greenhouse gas emissions, contribute to effective global action on climate change, and support technological innovation in clean and renewable energy, through developing and implementing a national response to climate change Budgeted expenses for Outcome 2 This table shows how much the entity intends to spend on an accrual basis on achieving the outcome, broken down by program, as well as by administered and departmental funding sources. The Administrative Arrangements Order of 23 June 2022 resulted in the transfer of climate change programs to the Department of Climate Change, Energy, the Environment and Water. Expenses for these programs from 2022 23 onwards are reported in the Climate Change, Energy, the Environment and Water October 2022 23 PB Statements. Table 2.2.1 Budgeted expenses for Outcome 2 2021 22 2022 23 2023 24 2024 25 2025 26 Estimated Budget Forward Forward Forward actual estimate estimate estimate 000 000 000 000 000 Program 2.1 Reducing Australia s greenhouse gas emissions a Administered expenses Ordinary annual services Appropriation Bill No. 1 Activating Regional Hydrogen Export Hubs 2,500 Biofuels Monitoring, Compliance and Enforcement for Fuel Quality 100 Carbon Capture, Use and Storage Development Fund 19,340 Emissions Reduction and New Investments Under the Technology Investment Roadmap 35,268 Hydrogen Strategy and Implementation 639 Soil Carbon and Livestock Methane 3,508 Administered Total 61,355 Departmental expenses Departmental appropriation 66,304 s74 external revenue b 3,311 Expenses not requiring appropriation in the budget year c 584 Departmental Total 70,199 Total expenses for Program 2.1 131,554  Portfolio Budget Statements Department of Industry, Science and Resources Page 53 Table 2.2.1 Budgeted expenses for Outcome 2 continued 2021 22 2022 23 2023 24 2024 25 2025 26 Estimated Budget Forward Forward Forward actual estimate estimate estimate 000 000 000 000 000 Program 2.2 Developing clean energy technology a Administered expenses Ordinary annual services Appropriation Bill No. 1 124,312 Less payments to corporate entities 124,312 Special appropriations Australian Renewable Energy Agency Act 2011 304,836 Less payments to corporate entities 304,836 Payments to corporate entities 429,148 Administered Total 429,148 Departmental expenses Departmental appropriation 6,822 Departmental Total 6,822 Total expenses for Program 2.2 435,970 Outcome 2 Totals by appropriation type Administered expenses Ordinary annual services Appropriation Bill No. 1 61,355 Payments to corporate entities 429,148 Administered Total 490,503 Departmental expenses Departmental appropriation 73,126 s74 external revenue b 3,311 Expenses not requiring appropriation in the budget year c 584 Departmental Total 77,021 Total expenses for Outcome 2 567,524 2021 22 2022 23 Average staffing level number 165 Departmental appropriation splits and totals are indicative estimates and may change in the course of the Budget year as government priorities change. a The Administrative Arrangements Order of 23 June 2022 resulted in the transfer of climate change programs to the Department of Climate Change, Energy, the Environment and Water. These arrangements took effect on 1 July 2022, therefore the estimated actuals for 2021 22 are published in this PB Statement. For information on the 2022 23 and forward year financial impacts, refer to the Climate Change, Energy, the Environment and Water October 2022 23 PB Statements. b Estimated expenses incurred in relation to receipts retained under section 74 of the PGPA Act 2013. c Expenses not requiring appropriation in the Budget year are made up of depreciation expenses. Table 2.2.2 Program components of Outcome 2 Outcome 2 programs are not broken down by components therefore Table 2.2.2 is not presented.   Portfolio Budget Statements Page 54 Department of Industry, Science and Resources Table 2.2.3 Performance measure for Outcome 2 For information on the performance measures for climate change programs please refer to the Climate Change, Energy, the Environment and Water October 2022 23 PB Statements.  Portfolio Budget Statements Department of Industry, Science and Resources Page 55 2.3 Budgeted expenses and performance for Outcome 3 Outcome 3 Support the affordable, reliable, secure and competitive operation of energy markets for the long term benefit of the Australian community through improving Australia s energy supply, efficiency, quality, performance and productivity Budgeted expenses for Outcome 3 This table shows how much the entity intends to spend on an accrual basis on achieving the outcome, broken down by program, as well as by administered and departmental funding sources. The Administrative Arrangements Order of 23 June 2022 resulted in the transfer of energy market programs to the Department of Climate Change, Energy, the Environment and Water. Expenses for these programs from 2022 23 onwards are reporting in the Climate Change, Energy, the Environment and Water October 2022 23 PB Statements. Table 2.3.1 Budgeted expenses for Outcome 3 2021 22 2022 23 2023 24 2024 25 2025 26 Estimated Budget Forward Forward Forward actual estimate estimate estimate 000 000 000 000 000 Program 3.1 Supporting reliable, secure and affordable energy a Administered expenses Ordinary annual services Appropriation Bill No. 1 Boosting Australia s Fuel Security 66,689 Business Energy Advice Program 2,803 Consumer Data Right in the Energy Sector 5,373 Contribution to the International Energy Agency 2,000 Energy Efficiency Programs 598 Energy Efficient Communities Program 781 Energy Use Data Model for Better Forecasting 1,971 Establish a Renewable Microgrid Incorporating Hydrogen in the Daintree Community 750 Funding for Refinery Upgrades 17,500 Further Support for CopperString 2.0 Project 1,100 GEMS National Legislative Framework 3,750 Hotel Energy Uplift Program 9,737 Improving Cyber Security in the Energy Sector 600   Portfolio Budget Statements Page 56 Department of Industry, Science and Resources Table 2.3.1 Budgeted expenses for Outcome 3 continued 2021 22 2022 23 2023 24 2024 25 2025 26 Estimated Budget Forward Forward Forward actual estimate estimate estimate 000 000 000 000 000 International Energy Agency Compliance Collective Action Response 5,556 Micro grids Regional and Remote Communities 22,005 Powering Communities Program 8,208 Supporting Reliable Energy Infrastructure 1,356 Supporting the Port Kembla Power Station 21,923 Temporary Refinery Production Payment Program 41,494 Total ordinary annual services 214,194 Special appropriations Fuel Security Service Payment 12,446 Total special appropriations 12,446 Expenses not requiring appropriation in the budget year b 277 Administered Total 226,917 Departmental expenses Departmental appropriation 92,479 Special accounts 12,608 Expenses not requiring appropriation in the budget year b 1,604 Departmental Total 106,691 Total expenses for Program 3.1 333,608 Outcome 3 Totals by appropriation type Administered expenses Ordinary annual services Appropriation Bill No. 1 214,194 Special appropriations 12,446 Expenses not requiring appropriation in the budget year 277 Administered Total 226,917 Departmental expenses Departmental appropriation 92,479 Special accounts 12,608 Expenses not requiring appropriation in the budget year b 1,604 Departmental Total 106,691 Total expenses for Outcome 3 333,608 2021 22 2022 23 Average staffing level number 294 Departmental appropriation splits and totals are indicative estimates and may change in the course of the Budget year as government priorities change.  Portfolio Budget Statements Department of Industry, Science and Resources Page 57 a The Administrative Arrangements Order of 23 June 2022 resulted in the transfer of energy market programs to the Department of Climate Change, Energy, the Environment and Water. These arrangements took effect on 1 July 2022, therefore the estimated actuals for 2021 22 are published in this PB Statement. For information on the 2022 23 and forward year financial impacts, refer to the Climate Change, Energy, the Environment and Water October 2022 23 PB Statements. b Expenses not requiring appropriation in the Budget year are made up of depreciation and other non cash expenses. Table 2.3.2 Program components of Outcome 3 Outcome 3 programs are not broken down by components therefore Table 2.3.2 is not presented. Table 2.3.3 Performance measure for Outcome 3 For information on the performance measures for energy market programs please refer to the Climate Change, Energy, the Environment and Water October 2022 23 PB Statements.   Portfolio Budget Statements Page 58 Department of Industry, Science and Resources Section 3 Budgeted financial statements Section 3 presents budgeted financial statements which provide a comprehensive snapshot of entity finances for the 2022 23 Budget year, including the impact of Budget measures and resourcing on financial statements. 3.1 Budgeted financial statements 3.1.1 Differences between entity resourcing and financial statements There are no material differences between the entity resources table and the financial statements. 3.1.2 Explanatory notes and analysis of budgeted financial statements Departmental Financial Statements Budgeted Departmental Income Statement The statement shows the estimated net cost of services for the department. The budgeted net cost to the department for delivering its programs in 2022 23 is 620.9 million. Expenses Total departmental expenses budgeted for in 2022 23 are 719.8 million, comprising of 394.5 million for employee expenses, 247.5 million for suppliers, 68.4 million for depreciation and amortisation, 6.4 million for grants and 2.9 million for finance costs and other expenses. Income Total departmental own source income budgeted for in 2022 23 is 98.2 million, comprising of 89.1 million from sales of goods and rendering of services, 2.8 million from rental income and 6.3 million from other independent sources. Revenue from government for 2022 23 is budgeted at 577.7 million. Budgeted Departmental Balance Sheet The statement shows the estimated end of year position for departmental assets and liabilities. Assets Total departmental assets budgeted for 2022 23 are 690.1 million, comprising of 474.3 million non financial assets and 215.9 million financial assets. Non financial assets include 305.4 million for land and buildings, 110.8 million for intangibles, 41.4 million for property, plant and equipment, 2.0 million for inventories, and 14.7 million in other assets. Financial assets consist of 194.0 million for receivables, 11.5 million for cash, and 10.4 million in other financial assets.  Portfolio Budget Statements Department of Industry, Science and Resources Page 59 Liabilities Total departmental liabilities budgeted for in 2022 23 are 405.9 million, comprising of 226.6 million in interest bearing liabilities, 101.5 million in provisions and 77.8 million in payables. Statement of Changes in Equity Summary of movement The statement shows the expected movement of equity during the budget year. Budgeted Departmental Statement of Cash Flows The statement provides information on estimates of the extent and nature of cash flows by categorising the expected cash flows against operating, investing and financing activities. Administered Financial Statements Schedule of Budgeted Income and Expenses The schedule shows the estimated income and expenses for programs administered by the department on behalf of the Government. Expenses Total administered expenses budgeted for in 2022 23 are 3.3 billion, represented by 1.3 billion in payments to corporate entities, 1.6 billion in grants and subsidies and 0.4 billion in suppliers and other expenses. Income Total administered income budgeted for in 2022 23 is 1.6 billion, largely represented by royalty revenue. Schedule of Budgeted Assets and Liabilities The schedule shows the estimated end of year position for assets and liabilities administered by the department on behalf of the Government. Assets Total administered assets budgeted for in 2022 23 are 5.4 billion, represented by 4.2 billion in investments, 1.1 billion in cash and receivables and 0.1 billion in accrued revenue. Administered assets in 2022 23 also include 12.7 million in non financial assets. Liabilities Total administered liabilities budgeted for in 2022 23 are 1.6 billion, largely represented by provisions for rehabilitation. Schedule of Budget Administered Cash Flows The schedule shows the estimated cash receipts and payments administered by the department on behalf of the Government.   Portfolio Budget Statements Page 60 Department of Industry, Science and Resources 3.2 Budgeted financial statements tables Table 3.1 Comprehensive income statement showing net cost of services for the period ended 30 June 2021 22 2022 23 2023 24 2024 25 2025 26 Estimated Budget Forward Forward Forward actual estimate estimate estimate 000 000 000 000 000 EXPENSES Employee benefits 406,860 394,470 345,036 319,606 304,357 Suppliers 282,637 247,547 225,930 182,026 176,429 Grants 10,559 6,424 5,501 5,547 5,194 Depreciation and amortisation 77,051 68,412 56,870 56,332 55,940 Write down and impairment of assets 1,725 Net foreign exchange losses 13 Finance costs 3,284 2,920 2,619 2,373 2,106 Other expenses 680 26 13 11 4 Total expenses 782,809 719,799 635,969 565,895 544,030 LESS OWN SOURCE INCOME Own source revenue Sale of goods and rendering of services 88,502 89,098 69,185 64,938 59,158 Rental income 3,122 2,762 2,871 2,988 3,091 Other revenue 17,337 6,327 5,447 5,450 5,450 Total own source revenue 108,961 98,187 77,503 73,376 67,699 Gains Other gains 1,116 675 680 680 680 Gains on lease disposal 142 Foreign exchange gains 1 Reversals of previous asset write downs and impairments 1 Total gains 1,260 675 680 680 680 Total own source income 110,221 98,862 78,183 74,056 68,379 Net cost of contribution by services 672,588 620,937 557,786 491,839 475,651 Revenue from Government 664,471 577,670 526,304 462,252 446,456 Surplus deficit attributable to the Australian Government 8,117 43,267 31,482 29,587 29,195 OTHER COMPREHENSIVE INCOME Changes in asset revaluation reserves 1,061 Total other comprehensive income 1,061 Total comprehensive income loss attributable to the Australian Government 9,178 43,267 31,482 29,587 29,195  Portfolio Budget Statements Department of Industry, Science and Resources Page 61 Table 3.1 Comprehensive income statement showing net cost of services for the period ended 30 June continued Note Impact of net cash appropriation arrangements 2021 22 2022 23 2023 24 2024 25 2025 26 Estimated Budget Forward Forward Forward actual estimate estimate estimate 000 000 000 000 000 Total comprehensive income loss as per the statement of comprehensive income 9,178 43,267 31,482 29,587 29,195 plus depreciation amortisation of assets funded through appropriations departmental capital budget funding and or equity injections a 44,260 39,188 28,771 28,189 28,189 plus depreciation amortisation expenses for ROU assets b 32,791 29,224 28,099 28,143 27,751 less principal repayments on leased assets b 28,505 24,875 25,388 26,745 26,745 Net Cash Operating Surplus Deficit 39,369 270 Prepared on Australian Accounting Standards basis. a From 2010 11, the Government introduced net cash appropriation arrangements where Bill 1 revenue appropriations for the depreciation amortisation expenses of non corporate Commonwealth entities were replaced with a separate capital budget the departmental capital budget, or DCB provided through Bill 1 equity appropriations. For information regarding DCB, please refer to Table 3.5 Departmental Capital Budget Statement. b Applies leases under AASB 16 Leases.   Portfolio Budget Statements Page 62 Department of Industry, Science and Resources Table 3.2 Budgeted departmental balance sheet as at 30 June 2021 22 2022 23 2023 24 2024 25 2025 26 Estimated Budget Forward Forward Forward actual estimate estimate estimate 000 000 000 000 000 ASSETS Financial assets Cash and cash equivalents 26,420 11,493 11,504 11,542 11,580 Trade and other receivables 224,678 193,984 190,749 187,829 187,791 Accrued revenue 241 10,398 10,398 10,398 10,398 Total financial assets 251,339 215,875 212,651 209,769 209,769 Non financial assets Land and buildings 341,441 305,397 275,923 254,730 233,218 Property, plant and equipment 41,651 41,431 37,361 31,991 26,656 Intangibles 83,778 110,773 142,633 156,993 168,613 Inventories 1,962 1,962 1,962 1,962 1,962 Other non financial assets 15,220 14,688 14,688 14,688 14,688 Total non financial assets 484,052 474,251 472,567 460,364 445,137 Total assets 735,391 690,126 685,218 670,133 654,906 LIABILITIES Payables Suppliers 68,557 65,601 65,601 65,601 65,601 Grants 5,800 5,800 5,800 5,800 5,800 Other payables 15,979 6,387 6,022 6,022 6,022 Total payables 90,336 77,788 77,423 77,423 77,423 Interest bearing liabilities Leases 257,029 226,603 204,059 188,465 172,145 Total interest bearing liabilities 257,029 226,603 204,059 188,465 172,145 Provisions Employee provisions 125,450 99,682 99,682 99,682 99,682 Other provisions 1,782 1,782 1,782 1,782 1,782 Total provisions 127,232 101,464 101,464 101,464 101,464 Total liabilities 474,597 405,855 382,946 367,352 351,032 Net assets 260,794 284,271 302,272 302,781 303,874 EQUITY Parent entity interest Contributed equity 662,659 703,689 753,172 783,268 813,556 Reserves 19,372 21,082 21,082 21,082 21,082 Retained surplus accumulated deficit 421,237 440,500 471,982 501,569 530,764 Total parent entity interest 260,794 284,271 302,272 302,781 303,874 Total equity 260,794 284,271 302,272 302,781 303,874 Prepared on Australian Accounting Standards basis. Equity is the residual interest in assets after deduction of liabilities.  Portfolio Budget Statements Department of Industry, Science and Resources Page 63 Table 3.3 Departmental statement of changes in equity summary of movement Budget year 2022 23 Retained earnings 000 Asset revaluation reserve 000 Contributed equity capital 000 Total equity 000 Opening balance as at 1 July 2022 Balance carried forward from previous period 421,237 19,372 662,659 260,794 Adjusted opening balance 421,237 19,372 662,659 260,794 Comprehensive income Surplus deficit for the period 43,267 43,267 Total comprehensive income 43,267 43,267 of which Attributable to the Australian Government 43,267 43,267 Transactions with owners Distributions to owners Returns of capital Restructuring 9,740 1,710 11,450 Contributions by owners Equity injection Appropriation 35,199 35,199 Departmental Capital Budget 26,147 26,147 Restructuring 14,264 20,316 6,052 Subtotal transactions with owners 24,004 1,710 41,030 66,744 Estimated closing balance as at 30 June 2023 440,500 21,082 703,689 284,271 Closing balance attributable to the Australian Government 440,500 21,082 703,689 284,271 Prepared on Australian Accounting Standards basis.   Portfolio Budget Statements Page 64 Department of Industry, Science and Resources Table 3.4 Budgeted departmental statement of cash flows for the period ended 30 June 2021 22 2022 23 2023 24 2024 25 2025 26 Estimated Budget Forward Forward Forward actual estimate estimate estimate 000 000 000 000 000 OPERATING ACTIVITIES Cash received Appropriations 727,572 670,259 601,595 533,098 508,743 Sale of goods and rendering of services 105,861 91,860 72,056 67,926 62,249 Net GST received 30,107 25,896 22,507 18,384 17,706 Rental income 2,826 Other 27,138 5,006 5,082 5,450 5,450 Total cash received 893,504 793,021 701,240 624,858 594,148 Cash used Employees 415,828 392,802 345,036 319,606 304,357 Suppliers 319,382 272,838 247,757 199,730 193,455 Grants 5,547 6,424 5,501 5,547 5,194 s74 external revenue transferred to the OPA 116,532 91,860 72,056 67,926 62,249 Interest payments on lease liability 3,278 2,920 2,619 2,373 2,106 Other 6,063 26 13 11 4 Total cash used 866,630 766,870 672,982 595,193 567,365 Net cash from used by operating activities 26,874 26,151 28,258 29,665 26,783 INVESTING ACTIVITIES Cash received Proceeds from sales of property, plant and equipment 32 Total cash received 32 Cash used Purchase of property, plant, equipment and intangibles 46,355 74,328 49,716 30,096 30,288 Total cash used 46,355 74,328 49,716 30,096 30,288 Net cash from used by investing activities 46,323 74,328 49,716 30,096 30,288 FINANCING ACTIVITIES Cash received Appropriations contributed equity 45,771 70,068 46,857 27,214 30,288 Total cash received 45,771 70,068 46,857 27,214 30,288 Cash used Principal payments on lease liability 28,505 24,875 25,388 26,745 26,745 Restructuring 11,943 Total cash used 28,505 36,818 25,388 26,745 26,745 Net cash from used by financing activities 17,266 33,250 21,469 469 3,543 Net increase decrease in cash held 2,183 14,927 11 38 38 Cash and cash equivalents at the beginning of the reporting period 28,603 26,420 11,493 11,504 11,542 Cash and cash equivalents at the end of the reporting period 26,420 11,493 11,504 11,542 11,580 Prepared on Australian Accounting Standards basis.  Portfolio Budget Statements Department of Industry, Science and Resources Page 65 Table 3.5 Departmental capital budget statement for the period ended 30 June 2021 22 2022 23 2023 24 2024 25 2025 26 Estimated Budget Forward Forward Forward actual estimate estimate estimate 000 000 000 000 000 NEW CAPITAL APPROPRIATIONS Departmental capital budget Appropriation Bill No. 1 27,432 26,147 25,996 26,302 26,534 Equity injections Appropriation Bill No. 2 36,328 35,199 23,487 3,794 3,754 Total new capital appropriations 63,760 61,346 49,483 30,096 30,288 Provided for Purchase of non financial assets 63,760 61,346 49,483 30,096 30,288 Total Items 63,760 61,346 49,483 30,096 30,288 PURCHASE OF NON FINANCIAL ASSETS Funded by capital appropriations a 34,474 41,794 23,720 3,794 3,754 Funded by capital appropriations DCB b 22,272 32,534 25,996 26,302 26,534 TOTAL 56,746 74,328 49,716 30,096 30,288 RECONCILIATION OF CASH USED TO ACQUIRE ASSETS TO ASSET MOVEMENT TABLE Total purchases 62,139 82,819 52,560 41,247 40,713 less ROU Additions 14,482 8,491 2,844 11,151 10,425 Total cash used to acquire assets 47,657 74,328 49,716 30,096 30,288 Prepared on Australian Accounting Standards basis. a Includes both current Bill 2 and prior Act 2 4 6 appropriations. b Includes purchases from current and previous years departmental capital budgets DCBs .   Portfolio Budget Statements Page 66 Department of Industry, Science and Resources Table 3.6 Statement of asset movements Budget year 2022 23 Buildings Other Computer Total property, software plant and equipment Intangibles 000 000 000 000 As at 1 July 2022 Gross book value 119,266 50,917 209,675 379,858 Gross book value ROU assets 339,546 3,700 343,246 Accumulated depreciation amortisation and impairment 24,024 10,412 125,897 160,333 Accumulated depreciation amortisation and impairment ROU assets 93,347 2,554 95,901 Opening net book balance 341,441 41,651 83,778 466,870 Capital asset additions Estimated expenditure on new or replacement assets By purchase appropriation equity a 8,355 17,701 48,272 74,328 By purchase other ROU assets 8,491 8,491 Total additions 16,846 17,701 48,272 82,819 Other movements Restructuring 13,437 3,040 7,199 23,676 Depreciation amortisation expense 10,830 14,280 14,078 39,188 Depreciation amortisation on ROU assets 28,623 601 29,224 Total other movements 52,890 17,921 21,277 92,088 As at 30 June 2023 Gross book value 114,184 65,578 250,748 430,510 Gross book value ROU assets 348,037 3,700 351,737 Accumulated depreciation amortisation and impairment 34,854 24,692 139,975 199,521 Accumulated depreciation amortisation and impairment ROU assets 121,970 3,155 125,125 Closing net book balance 305,397 41,431 110,773 457,601 Prepared on Australian Accounting Standards basis. a Appropriation equity refers to equity injections provided through Appropriation Bill No. 2 2022 23 and to funding provided through Appropriation Bill No. 1 2022 23 for the departmental capital budget.  Portfolio Budget Statements Department of Industry, Science and Resources Page 67 Table 3.7 Schedule of budgeted income and expenses administered on behalf of Government for the period ended 30 June 2021 22 2022 23 2023 24 2024 25 2025 26 Estimated Budget Forward Forward Forward actual estimate estimate estimate 000 000 000 000 000 EXPENSES Employee benefits 7,542 9,755 10,316 8,086 8,248 Suppliers 397,298 347,251 253,398 223,620 221,315 Fees 40 40 40 40 40 Grants and subsidies 833,366 1,562,069 984,600 417,141 312,629 Finance costs 8 1,598 3,906 12,905 14,761 Depreciation and amortisation 1,988 1,865 1,930 1,749 1,974 Write down and impairment of assets 263 5,508 2,352 Payments to corporate Commonwealth entities 1,749,683 1,330,643 1,354,143 1,241,413 1,262,395 Rehabilitation activities 1,460,710 Other expenses 7,675 5,282 Total expenses administered on behalf of Government 4,458,573 3,264,011 2,610,685 1,904,954 1,821,362 LESS OWN SOURCE INCOME Own source revenue Taxation revenue Indirect tax 1,033 550 550 550 550 Total taxation revenue 1,033 550 550 550 550 Non taxation revenue Fees from regulatory services 55,108 56,924 55,775 54,958 55,328 Fees 5,676 2,324 1,980 1,980 1,980 Interest 9,350 14,862 15,026 4,980 3,031 Dividends 163,638 Royalties 1,535,256 1,557,673 1,292,560 1,044,773 840,952 Other non taxation revenue 561,655 1,198 1,231 1,265 Total non taxation revenue 2,330,683 1,631,783 1,366,539 1,107,922 902,556 Total own source revenue administered on behalf of Government 2,331,716 1,632,333 1,367,089 1,108,472 903,106 Gains Other gains 162,933 8,164 11,821 Foreign exchange gains 4,972 Total gains administered on behalf of government 167,905 8,164 11,821 Total income 2,499,621 1,632,333 1,367,089 1,116,636 914,927 Net cost of contribution by services 1,958,952 1,631,678 1,243,596 788,318 906,435 OTHER COMPREHENSIVE INCOME Changes in asset revaluation reserve 2,491,770 Total other comprehensive income 2,491,770 Total comprehensive income loss 4,450,722 1,631,678 1,243,596 788,318 906,435 Prepared on Australian Accounting Standards basis.   Portfolio Budget Statements Page 68 Department of Industry, Science and Resources Table 3.8 Schedule of budgeted assets and liabilities administered on behalf of Government as at 30 June 2021 22 2022 23 2023 24 2024 25 2025 26 Estimated Budget Forward Forward Forward actual estimate estimate estimate 000 000 000 000 000 ASSETS Financial assets Cash in special accounts 5,126,964 489,852 420,066 279,365 154,498 Receivables 1,034,647 628,479 632,621 501,787 511,595 Other investments 19,400,790 4,151,659 4,196,653 4,309,448 4,289,996 Accrued revenue 81,628 129,920 107,713 87,064 70,079 Total financial assets 25,644,029 5,399,910 5,357,053 5,177,664 5,026,168 Non financial assets Land and buildings 1,350 4,247 4,889 3,669 2,203 Property, plant and equipment 50 626 454 282 365 Intangibles 4,329 7,679 7,920 8,063 8,227 Inventories 33,387 Prepayments 211 196 196 196 196 Total non financial assets 39,327 12,748 13,459 12,210 10,991 Total assets administered on behalf of Government 25,683,356 5,412,658 5,370,512 5,189,874 5,037,159 LIABILITIES Payables Suppliers 38,490 14,815 9,636 9,636 7,680 Grants 27,439 6,979 6,979 1,080 897 Other payables 295 295 295 295 295 Total payables 66,224 22,089 16,910 11,011 8,872 Interest bearing liabilities Leases 462 3,198 4,097 2,997 1,812 Total interest bearing liabilities 462 3,198 4,097 2,997 1,812 Provisions Employee provisions 2,383 2,383 2,383 2,383 2,383 Rehabilitation provision 2,052,338 1,544,279 1,346,220 1,194,946 1,083,690 Total provisions 2,054,721 1,546,662 1,348,603 1,197,329 1,086,073 Total liabilities administered on behalf of Government 2,121,407 1,571,949 1,369,610 1,211,337 1,096,757 Net assets liabilities 23,561,949 3,840,709 4,000,902 3,978,537 3,940,402 Prepared on Australian Accounting Standards basis.  Portfolio Budget Statements Department of Industry, Science and Resources Page 69 Table 3.9 Schedule of budgeted administered cash flows for the period ended 30 June 2021 22 2022 23 2023 24 2024 25 2025 26 Estimated Budget Forward Forward Forward actual estimate estimate estimate 000 000 000 000 000 OPERATING ACTIVITIES Cash received Interest 573 365 274 182 90 Dividends 163,638 Fees 5,742 550 550 550 550 Royalties 1,515,404 1,490,131 1,313,017 1,065,422 857,937 Net GST received 103,436 191,308 124,281 66,876 56,863 Other 20,989 36,796 20,929 19,211 19,247 Levy receipts 39,206 41,370 39,774 38,957 39,327 Total cash received 1,848,988 1,760,520 1,498,825 1,191,198 974,014 Cash used Suppliers 435,303 613,092 412,373 265,668 245,616 Grants and subsidies paid 963,071 1,720,333 1,083,065 467,558 347,370 Employees 7,424 9,755 10,316 8,086 8,248 Payments to corporate entities 1,749,683 1,330,643 1,354,143 1,241,413 1,262,395 Interest payments on lease liability 8 30 25 30 17 Other 136,323 74,000 144,499 126,000 Total cash used 3,155,489 3,810,176 2,933,922 2,127,254 1,989,646 Net cash from used by operating activities 1,306,501 2,049,656 1,435,097 936,056 1,015,632 INVESTING ACTIVITIES Cash received Repayments of loans and advances 900 2,025 2,025 139,025 2,025 Interest 1,314 7,076 6,233 4,772 2,928 Other 11,356 Total cash received 13,570 9,101 8,258 143,797 4,953 Cash used Advances and loans made 6,000 Investments 1,502,861 4,906 Purchase of property, plant, equipment and intangibles 1,465 4,935 690 500 755 Other 33,387 Investments in Corporate Commonwealth Entities 55,652 131,272 99,901 72,445 35,666 Total cash used 1,599,365 141,113 100,591 72,945 36,421 Net cash from used by investing activities 1,585,795 132,012 92,333 70,852 31,468   Portfolio Budget Statements Page 70 Department of Industry, Science and Resources Table 3.9 Schedule of budgeted administered cash flows for the period ended 30 June continued 2021 22 2022 23 2023 24 2024 25 2025 26 Estimated Budget Forward Forward Forward actual estimate estimate estimate 000 000 000 000 000 FINANCING ACTIVITIES Cash used Principal payments on lease liability 919 1,018 1,052 1,100 1,185 Restructuring 4,574,000 Total cash used 919 4,575,018 1,052 1,100 1,185 Net cash from used by financing activities 919 4,575,018 1,052 1,100 1,185 Net increase decrease in cash held 2,893,215 6,756,686 1,528,482 866,304 1,048,285 Cash and cash equivalents at beginning of reporting period 5,724,108 5,126,964 489,852 420,066 279,365 Cash from Official Public Account for Appropriations 3,070,698 3,730,965 2,841,124 1,965,401 1,845,810 Appropriation Administered assets and liabilities 909,476 8,646 540 Equity appropriation corporate entities 55,652 131,272 99,901 72,445 35,666 GST appropriations 105,007 191,308 124,281 66,876 56,863 Total cash from Official Public Account 4,140,833 4,062,191 3,065,846 2,104,722 1,938,339 Cash to Official Public Account for Appropriations 1,738,773 1,749,284 1,480,844 1,310,218 956,033 GST appropriations 103,436 191,308 124,281 66,876 56,863 Return of contributed equity 2,553 2,025 2,025 2,025 2,025 Total cash to Official Public Account 1,844,762 1,942,617 1,607,150 1,379,119 1,014,921 Cash and cash equivalents at end of reporting period 5,126,964 489,852 420,066 279,365 154,498 Prepared on Australian Accounting Standards basis.  Portfolio Budget Statements Department of Industry, Science and Resources Page 71 Table 3.10 Administered capital budget statement for the period ended 30 June 2021 22 2022 23 2023 24 2024 25 2025 26 Estimated Budget Forward Forward Forward actual estimate estimate estimate 000 000 000 000 000 NEW CAPITAL APPROPRIATIONS Administered assets and liabilities Act 2 and Bill 4 786,546 7,851 540 Total new capital appropriations 786,546 7,851 540 Provided for Purchase of non financial assets 1,410 2,945 540 Other Items 785,136 4,906 Total Items 786,546 7,851 540 PURCHASE OF NON FINANCIAL ASSETS Funded by capital appropriations 1,165 2,945 540 Funded by special accounts 1,000 1,990 150 500 755 TOTAL 2,165 4,935 690 500 755 RECONCILIATION OF CASH USED TO ACQUIRE ASSETS TO ASSET MOVEMENT TABLE Total purchases 2,165 8,688 2,641 500 755 Less ROU additions 3,753 1,951 Total cash used to acquire assets 2,165 4,935 690 500 755 Prepared on Australian Accounting Standards basis.   Portfolio Budget Statements Page 72 Department of Industry, Science and Resources Table 3.11 Statement of administered asset movements Budget year 2022 23 Land Buildings Other Computer Total property, software plant and equipmen t Intangible s 000 000 000 000 000 As at 1 July 2022 Gross book value 548 799 160 15,254 16,761 Gross book value ROU assets 3,216 3,216 Accumulated depreciation amortisation and impairment 452 110 10,925 11,487 Accumulated depreciation amortisation and impairment ROU assets 2,761 2,761 Opening net book balance 548 802 50 4,329 5,729 CAPITAL ASSET ADDITIONS Estimated expenditure on new or replacement assets By purchase appropriation equity a 2,945 2,945 By purchase other special account 400 695 895 1,990 By purchase other ROU assets 3,753 3,753 Total additions 4,153 695 3,840 8,688 Other movements Restructuring 548 548 Depreciation amortisation expense 316 119 490 925 Depreciation amortisation on ROU assets 940 940 Total other movements 548 708 119 490 1,865 As at 30 June 2023 Gross book value 1,747 855 19,094 21,696 Gross book value ROU 6,969 6,969 Accumulated depreciation amortisation and impairment 768 229 11,415 12,412 Accumulated depreciation amortisation and impairment ROU assets 3,701 3,701 Closing net book balance 4,247 626 7,679 12,552 Prepared on Australian Accounting Standards basis. a Appropriation equity refers to administered assets and liabilities appropriations provided through Appropriation Bill No.2 2022 23.   73 DEPARTMENT O Australian Nuclear Science and Technology Organisation Entity resources and planned performance   74   75 Australian Nuclear Science and Technology Organisation Section 1 Entity overview and resources 77 1.1 Strategic direction statement 77 1.2 Entity resource statement 79 1.3 Budget measures 80 Section 2 Outcomes and planned performance 81 2.1 Budgeted expenses and performance for Outcome 1 82 Section 3 Budgeted financial statements 94 3.1 Budgeted financial statements 94   76   Australian Nuclear Science and Technology Organisation Page 77 Australian Nuclear Science and Technology Organisation Section 1 Entity overview and resources 1.1 Strategic direction statement The Australian Nuclear Science and Technology Organisation ANSTO is a corporate Commonwealth entity within the Industry, Science and Resources Portfolio. The organisation s primary functions are set out in the Australian Nuclear Science and Technology Organisation Act 1987. ANSTO is Australia s national nuclear research and development organisation, and the centre of Australian nuclear expertise. ANSTO operates a large proportion of Australia s landmark research infrastructure, including the OPAL multipurpose reactor, the Australian Synchrotron, the Australian Centre for Neutron Scattering ACNS , and the Centre for Accelerator Science CAS . Thousands of researchers from across Australia and around the world partner with ANSTO to tackle complex problems that improve human health, save lives, build Australian industries, and protect the environment. ANSTO is the centre of nuclear medicine production in Australia. On average, ANSTO s radioisotopes enable 10,000 to 12,000 nuclear medicine procedures that benefit Australians each week battling cancer and other diseases. ANSTO s daily operations are critical to the health and wellbeing of the country. In 2022 23, ANSTO will deliver the first stage of a multi phased project for a new world leading nuclear medicine manufacturing facility, as the existing facility is nearing the end of its useful life. The project will create a facility design to provide Australian patients with technetium, lutetium, and iodine based products, and that will have the flexibility to respond to market and technological changes. The modern design will also enable greater process automation than is possible with the existing facility, leading to improvements in efficiency, quality, and, importantly, the highest levels of production and personal safety. In 2022 23, ANSTO will continue to provide expert advice and support to the Nuclear Powered Submarine Taskforce, baselining and augmenting Australia s stewardship capabilities and credentials. ANSTO has established a small, multidisciplinary team of experts to support this work. In addition, ANSTO will continue to prioritise activities and research to support Australia s response to the unprecedented challenges the country is facing including ANSTO scientists and its collaborators utilising our unique infrastructure, such as the Australian Synchrotron to better understand the structure of viruses, including COVID 19 which, in turn, assists in the development of vaccines and treatments.   Portfolio Budget Statements Page 78 Australian Nuclear Science and Technology Organisation Understanding climate change including contributions to Australia s critical Antarctic research program and its impact on Australia and its neighbours. Conducting research into Australian bushfires to assist with planning, mitigation, and response to extreme bushfire events. Prioritising water research and partnering with communities to provide a scientific basis for managing and sustaining Australia s precious groundwater resources. ANSTO s Australian Synchrotron continues its partner funded 95 million BR GHT beamline expansion program, with eight new beamlines being constructed. This will nearly double the Synchrotron s capacity and allow for broader engagement with researchers and industry in a range of applications, from high tech manufacturing, including aerospace and transport, to health, including drug development and medical implants. This investment supports the 520 million of operational funding provided by the Australian Government. More information on ANSTO, its strategic objectives, and major activities can be found in ANSTO s corporate plan and website  Portfolio Budget Statements Australian Nuclear Science and Technology Organisation Page 79 1.2 Entity resource statement Table 1.1 shows the total funding from all sources available to the entity for its operations and to deliver programs and services on behalf of the Government. The table summarises how resources will be applied by outcome government strategic policy objectives and by administered on behalf of the Government or the public and departmental for the entity s operations classification. Information in this table is presented on a resourcing that is, appropriations cash available basis, whilst the Budgeted expenses by Outcome 1 tables in Section 2 and the financial statements in Section 3 are presented on an accrual basis. Table 1.1 ANSTO resource statement Budget estimates for 2022 23 as at October Budget 2022 2021 22 Estimated actual 000 2022 23 Estimate 000 Opening balance cash reserves at 1 July 33,153 41,076 Funds from Government Annual appropriations ordinary annual services a c Outcome 1 279,506 289,027 Annual appropriations other services b c Equity injection 50,187 45,744 Total annual appropriations 329,693 334,771 Total funds from Government 329,693 334,771 Funds from other sources Interest 1,037 930 Sale of goods and services 97,536 96,099 Other 19,259 14,270 Total funds from other sources 117,832 111,299 Total net resourcing for ANSTO 480,678 487,146 2021 22 2022 23 Average staffing level number 1,333 1,364 All figures shown above are GST exclusive these may not match figures in the cash flow statement. Prepared on a resourcing i.e. appropriations available basis. a Appropriation Bill No. 1 2022 23, Supply Bill No. 3 2022 23 and Supply Act No. 1 2022 23. b Appropriation Bill No. 2 2022 23, Supply Bill No. 4 2022 23 and Supply Act No. 2 2022 23. c ANSTO is not directly appropriated as it is a corporate Commonwealth entity. Appropriations are made to the Department of Industry, Science and Resources and then paid to ANSTO and are considered departmental for all purposes.   Portfolio Budget Statements Page 80 Australian Nuclear Science and Technology Organisation 1.3 Budget measures Budget measures in Part 1 relating to ANSTO are detailed in October Budget Paper No. 2 Budget Measures and are summarised below. Table 1.2 ANSTO 2022 23 October Budget measures Part 1 Measures announced since the 2022 23 March Budget Program 2021 22 000 2022 23 000 2023 24 000 2024 25 000 2025 26 000 Payment measures Savings from External Labour, and Savings from Advertising, Travel and Legal Expenses a 1 Departmental payment 688 Total 688 Supporting Australia s Resources 1 Departmental payment 75 288 26 645 Total 75 288 26 645 Total payment measures Departmental 763 288 26 645 Total 763 288 26 645 Prepared on a Government Finance Statistics Underlying Cash basis. Figures displayed as a negative represent a decrease in funds and a positive represent an increase in funds. a The measure Savings from External Labour, and Savings from Advertising, Travel and Legal Expenses is part of a Cross Portfolio measure. The full measure description and package details appear in October Budget Paper No. 2 Budget Measures under Cross Portfolio.  Portfolio Budget Statements Australian Nuclear Science and Technology Organisation Page 81 Section 2 Outcomes and planned performance Government outcomes are the intended results, impacts or consequences of actions by the Government on the Australian community. Commonwealth programs are the primary vehicle by which government entities achieve the intended results of their outcome statements. Entities are required to identify the programs which contribute to government outcomes over the Budget and forward years. Each outcome is described below together with its related programs. The following provides detailed information on expenses for each outcome and program, further broken down by funding source. Note Performance reporting requirements in the Portfolio Budget Statements are part of the Commonwealth performance framework established by the Public Governance, Performance and Accountability Act 2013. It is anticipated that the performance criteria described in Portfolio Budget Statements will be read with broader information provided in an entity s corporate plans and annual performance statements included in annual reports to provide a complete picture of an entity s planned and actual performance. The most recent corporate plan for ANSTO can be found at The most recent annual performance statement can be found at   Portfolio Budget Statements Page 82 Australian Nuclear Science and Technology Organisation 2.1 Budgeted expenses and performance for Outcome 1 Outcome 1 Improved knowledge, innovative capacity and healthcare through nuclear based facilities, research, training, products, services and advice to Government, industry, the education sector and the Australian population Linked programs Department of Industry, Science and Resources Programs Program 1.1 Investing in science, technology and commercialisation Program 1.3 Supporting a strong resources sector Contribution to Outcome 1 made by linked programs The Department of Industry, Science and Resources contributes to Outcome 1 through its policies and programs supporting science and commercialisation, and the sustainability of development of the resources sector. Department of Education Program Program 2.6 Research Capacity Contribution to Outcome 1 made by linked program The Department of Education contributes to Outcome 1 through its policies and programs to invest in Australia s research capacity, including the National Collaborative Research Infrastructure Strategy. Department of Defence Program Program 2.5 Naval Capabilities Contribution to Outcome 1 made by linked program The Department of Defence contributes to Outcome 1 through its use of ANSTO s expertise and advice in the support of the Nuclear Powered Submarine Taskforce, with a focus on baselining and augmenting Australia s nuclear stewardship capabilities and credentials.  Portfolio Budget Statements Australian Nuclear Science and Technology Organisation Page 83 Budgeted expenses for Outcome 1 This table shows how much ANSTO intends to spend on an accrual basis on achieving the outcome, broken down by program, as well as by departmental funding sources. Table 2.1.1 Budgeted expenses for Outcome 1 Outcome 1 Improved knowledge, innovative capacity and healthcare through nuclear based facilities, research, training, products, services and advice to Government, industry, the education sector and the Australian population 2021 22 Estimated actual 000 2022 23 Budget 000 2023 24 Forward estimate 000 2024 25 Forward estimate 000 2025 26 Forward estimate 000 Program 1 Science and Technology Solutions Revenue from Government Ordinary annual services Appropriation Bill No. 1 279,506 289,027 300,637 283,096 291,495 Expenses not requiring appropriation in the budget year a 165,409 15,002 50,961 38,611 37,935 Revenues from other independent sources 154,132 121,696 81,216 119,147 119,137 Total expenses for Program 1 559,047 395,721 330,892 363,632 372,697 Outcome 1 totals by resource type Revenue from Government Ordinary annual services Appropriation Bill No. 1 279,506 289,027 300,637 283,096 291,495 Expenses not requiring appropriation in the budget year a 165,409 15,002 50,961 38,611 37,935 Revenues from other independent sources 154,132 121,696 81,216 119,147 119,137 Total expenses for Outcome 1 599,047 395,721 330,892 363,632 372,697 2021 22 2022 23 Average staffing level number 1,333 1,364 a Expenses not requiring appropriation in the Budget year reflects approved operating losses due to the accounting treatment of non cash items including ANSTO s ongoing decommissioning program, and depreciation costs for new facilities and asset revaluations. Note Departmental appropriation splits and totals are indicative estimates and may change in the course of the budget year as government priorities change.   Portfolio Budget Statements Page 84 Australian Nuclear Science and Technology Organisation Table 2.1.2 Performance measure for Outcome 1 Table 2.1.2 details the performance measures for each program associated with Outcome 1. It also provides the related key activities as expressed in the current corporate plan where further detail is provided about the delivery of the activities related to the program, the context in which these activities are delivered and how the performance of these activities will be measured. Where relevant, details of 2022 23 October Budget measures that have created new programs or materially changed existing programs are provided. Outcome 1 Improved knowledge, innovative capacity and healthcare through nuclear based facilities, research, training, products, services and advice to Government, industry, the education sector and the Australian population Program 1 Science and Technology Solutions Contributes to the outcome through the operation and strategic management of landmark and national research infrastructure. ANSTO provides nuclear products and services, and applies its unique expertise for nuclear research, specialised advice, and education and training. Key Activities a Key activities reported in the current corporate plan that relate to this program Operate world class research infrastructure, and leverage capabilities to deliver outcomes for Australia. Ensure the reliable and sustainable supply of commercial products and services for the benefit of Australia and the world. Use knowledge incubation, research translation, and collaboration within the Innovation Precinct to produce real world benefits. Ensure the reliable and sustainable supply of nuclear medicines, products and services. Form strategic partnerships and collaborations to leverage more effective research outcomes for Australia and the world. Deliver expert advice to Local, State, and Federal Governments and related stakeholders to support the national interest. Participate in global and regional nuclear discussions and forums to ensure that Australia remains a leader in the application of nuclear science and technology. Grow a more informed generation of Australians who understand the benefits of nuclear science and technology. Lead the development of a nuclear capable workforce aligned with government policy objectives. Year Performance measures Expected Performance Results Prior Year 2021 22 Full utilisation of landmark infrastructure. OPAL Research Reactor days at power Target 290 days Actual 310 days Australian Synchrotron percentage utilisation Target 95 Actual 97  Portfolio Budget Statements Australian Nuclear Science and Technology Organisation Page 85 Prior Year 2021 22 Full utilisation of landmark infrastructure continued . Neutron beam instruments percentage utilisation Target 85 Actual 84 b Accelerators percentage of utilisation Target 65 Actual 78 National deuteration facility percentage utilisation Target 90 Actual 100 User satisfaction Net Promoter Score across all facilities Target 90 Actual 93 Ensure the reliable and sustainable supply of nuclear medicines. ANM Mo 99 delivery in full and on time c Target 95 or greater Actual 95 ANSTO Nuclear Medicine Production Facility delivery in full and on time c Target 95 or greater Actual 94 d NTD Silicon delivery in full and on time Target 95 or greater Actual 85.3 d Deliver and translate research that has scientific and industrial impact. Publications undertaken with national and international collaborators Target 95 or greater Actual 97 Case studies demonstrating the impact of our research Target eight case studies for reporting period. Actual eight case studies for reporting period. Total publications per calendar year ANSTO only, ANSTO with national and or international co authors or both Target 600 or greater Actual 610   Portfolio Budget Statements Page 86 Australian Nuclear Science and Technology Organisation Prior Year 2021 22 Deliver and translate research that has scientific and industrial impact continued . External revenue from research and research services excluding National Collaborative Research Infrastructure Strategy, NCRIS Grants Target 5.0m Actual 6.9m New jobs created each year within the Innovation Precinct e Target 10 Actual 355 Ensure a highly reliable, safe and secure environment. Improvement in safety culture Target increase in Opportunities for Improvement to Actual Incidents recorded Actual Target achieved Improvement in site wide safety Target year on year decrease in class 1, 2, and 3 incidents Forecast actual Target achieved Class 1 damage that permanently alters a person s life. Class 2 damage that temporarily alters a person s life. Class 3 inconveniences in person s life or 105 days shifts off work. Providing expert advice and being a trusted advisor. Australian Government Stakeholder satisfaction Federal, State and Local Government Target 75 Actual 90.5 Case studies to highlight and assess the impact of ANSTO s engagement with Government related stakeholders Target 4 or more cases studies per annum Actual Target achieved Facilitation of Australian participation and leadership in International Atomic Energy Agency IAEA and Regional Cooperative Agreement RCA programs Target Participation in 80 of RCA active projects Actual 98 Target leading at least 1 RCA project Actual Target achieved  Portfolio Budget Statements Australian Nuclear Science and Technology Organisation Page 87 Prior Year 2021 22 Providing expert advice and being a trusted advisor continued . Target Participation in at least 10 IAEA coordinated research projects relevant to nuclear applications Actual 41 projects Case studies to highlight and assess the impact of ANSTO engagement with international stakeholders Target at least 2 per annum Actual Target achieved Share with the general public research outcomes enabled by ANSTO. Target at least 36 stories published on the ANSTO website per annum Actual 77 Offer a range of resources for teachers and student to support the national science curriculum outcomes for years 3 to 12. Target Deliver at least six national programs per annum Actual Target achieved Increase accessibility of STEM teacher training programs. Target Deliver teacher professional development days in all states and territories Actual Target achieved f Conduct educational tours and science experiences at ANSTO s Sydney and Melbourne campuses. Target At least 15,000 visitors per annum Actual 5,054 g Leadership teams representation. Target Female 40 Male 40 Discretionary 20 Actual Female 37.5 Male 62.5 ANSTO wide representation. Target Female 40 Male 40 Discretionary 20 Actual Female 31.7 Male 68.3 Postgraduates supervised. Target 120 Actual 164   Portfolio Budget Statements Page 88 Australian Nuclear Science and Technology Organisation Year Performance measures Planned Performance Results Budget Year 2022 23 Full utilisation of landmark infrastructure. OPAL Research Reactor days at power Target 290 days Australian Synchrotron percentage utilisation Annual Target 95 Neutron beam instruments percentage utilisation Annual Target 85 Accelerators percentage utilisation Annual Target 65 National deuteration facility percentage utilisation Annual Target 90 User satisfaction Net Promoter Score across all facilities Annual Target 90 Ensure the reliable and sustainable supply of nuclear medicines. ANM Mo 99 delivery in full and on time Target 95 or greater ANSTO Nuclear Medicine Production Facility delivery in full and on time Target 95 or greater NTD Silicon delivery in full and on time Target 95 or greater Deliver and translate research that has scientific and industrial impact. Publications undertaken with national and international collaborators Target 95 or greater Case studies demonstrating the impact of our research Target eight case studies for reporting period Total publications ANSTO only, ANSTO with national and or international co authors or both Target 580 650  Portfolio Budget Statements Australian Nuclear Science and Technology Organisation Page 89 Budget Year 2022 23 Deliver and translate research that has scientific and industrial impact continued . External revenue from research and research services excluding National Collaborative Research Infrastructure Strategy, NCRIS Grants Target 5.25m New jobs supported each year within the Innovation Precinct e Target 360 Ensure a highly reliable, safe and secure environment. Improvement in safety culture Target increase in Opportunities for Improvement to Actual Incidents recorded Improvement in site wide safety Target zero class 1 incidents, year on year decrease in class 2 and 3 incidents Providing expert advice and being a trusted advisor. Australian Government Stakeholder satisfaction Federal, State and Local Government Target 75 Case studies to highlight and assess the impact of ANSTO s engagement with Government related stakeholders Target 4 or more cases studies per annum Facilitation of Australian participation and leadership in International Atomic Energy Agency IAEA and Regional Cooperative Agreement RCA programs Target Participation in 80 of RCA active projects Target leading at least 1 RCA project Target Participation in at least 10 IAEA projects relevant to nuclear applications. projects Case studies to highlight and assess the impact of ANSTO engagement with international stakeholders Target at least 2 per annum Share with the general public research outcomes enabled by ANSTO. Target at least 36 stories published on the ANSTO website per annum Offer a range of resources for teachers and student to support the national science curriculum outcomes for years 3 to 12. Target Deliver at least six national programs per annum   Portfolio Budget Statements Page 90 Australian Nuclear Science and Technology Organisation Budget Year 2022 23 Increase accessibility of STEM teacher training programs. Target Deliver teacher professional development days in all states and territories Conduct educational tours and science experiences at ANSTO s Sydney and Melbourne campuses. Target At least 15,000 visitors per annum Leadership teams representation. Target Female 40 Male 40 Discretionary 20 ANSTO wide representation. Target Female 40 Male 40 Discretionary 20 Postgraduates supervised. Target 120 Forward Estimates 2023 26 Full utilisation of landmark infrastructure. OPAL Research Reactor days at power 2023 24 Target 220 days h 2024 25 Target 300 days h 2025 26 Target 300 days Australian Synchrotron percentage utilisation Annual Target 95 Neutron beam instruments percentage utilisation Annual Target 85 Accelerators percentage utilisation Annual Target 65 National deuteration facility percentage utilisation Annual Target 90 User satisfaction Net Promoter Score across all facilities Annual Target 90 Ensure the reliable and sustainable supply of nuclear medicines. ANM Mo 99 delivery in full and on time Annual Target 95 or greater ANSTO Nuclear Medicine Production Facility delivery in full and on time Annual Target 95 or greater NTD Silicon delivery in full and on time Target 95 or greater  Portfolio Budget Statements Australian Nuclear Science and Technology Organisation Page 91 Forward Estimates 2023 26 Deliver and translate research that has scientific and industrial impact. Publications undertaken with national and international collaborators Annual Target 95 or greater Case studies demonstrating the impact of our research Annual Target eight case studies for reporting period Total publications ANSTO only, ANSTO with national and or international co authors or both Target 580 650 External revenue from research and research services excluding National Collaborative Research Infrastructure Strategy, NCRIS Grants . 2023 24 Target 5.5m 2024 25 Target 5.5m 2025 26 Target 6m New jobs supported each year within the Innovation Precinct e 2023 24 Target 370 2024 25 Target 380 2025 26 Target 390 Ensure a highly reliable, safe and secure environment. Improvement in safety culture Target increase in Opportunities for Improvement to Actual Incidents recorded Improvement in site wide safety Target no class 1 incidents and year on year decrease in class 2 and 3 incidents Providing expert advice and being a trusted advisor. Australian Government Stakeholder satisfaction Federal, State and Local Government Target 75 Case studies to highlight and assess the impact of ANSTO s engagement with Government related stakeholders Target 4 or more cases studies per annum Facilitation of Australian participation and leadership in International Atomic Energy Agency IAEA and Regional Cooperative Agreement RCA programs Target Participation in 80 of RCA active projects   Portfolio Budget Statements Page 92 Australian Nuclear Science and Technology Organisation a Further details and a full list of ANSTO s key activities and performance criteria can be found in ANSTO s 2022 2026 Corporate Plan. b The target for ANSTO s nuclear beam instruments was not achieved due to the impact of COVID 19, including restrictions to user access and travel, and unplanned outages due to aging equipment. c ANSTO has revised its performance criteria for nuclear medicine manufacturing away from theoretical patient doses to delivery in full and on time DIFOT , an industry standard and customer centric performance indicator of the overall supply performance of ANSTO Nuclear Medicine. d These targets were not achieved due to COVID 19 restrictions adversely affecting staffing and supply chain capacity. e This performance criterion has been reassessed and changed to report on jobs supported as opposed to jobs created , which is a more valid and reliable measure to assess the impact of the Innovation Precinct on industry. Jobs are measured by how many employees member businesses hire. f Training sessions were run on line due to COVID 19. g Tours did not operate for five months due to COVID 19. Forward Estimates 2023 26 Providing expert advice and being a trusted advisor continued . Target leading at least 1 RCA project Target Participation in at least 10 IAEA projects relevant to nuclear applications. Projects. Case studies to highlight and assess the impact of ANSTO engagement with international stakeholders Target at least 2 per annum Share with the general public research outcomes enabled by ANSTO. Target at least 36 stories published on the ANSTO website per annum Offer a range of resources for teachers and student to support the national science curriculum outcomes for years 3 to 12. Target Deliver at least six national programs per annum Increase accessibility of STEM teacher training programs. Target Deliver teacher professional development days in all states and territories Conduct educational tours and science experiences at ANSTO s Sydney and Melbourne campuses. Target At least 15,000 visitors per annum Leadership teams representation. Leadership team representation Target Female 40 Male 40 Discretionary 20 ANSTO wide representation. ANSTO wide representation Target Female 40 Male 40 Discretionary 20 Postgraduates supervised. Postgraduates supervised 2023 24 Target 150 2024 25 Target 160 2025 26 Target 160 Material changes to Program 1 resulting from 2022 23 October Budget Measures Nil.  Portfolio Budget Statements Australian Nuclear Science and Technology Organisation Page 93 h The decreased days at power in 2023 24 is due to an extended maintenance shutdown of the OPAL Reactor to replace the cold neutron source. Note the 2022 26 corporate plan has reversed the 2023 24 and 2024 25 OPAL planned days at power.   Portfolio Budget Statements Page 94 Australian Nuclear Science and Technology Organisation Section 3 Budgeted financial statements Section 3 presents budgeted financial statements which provide a comprehensive snapshot of entity finances for the 2022 23 Budget year, including the impact of budget measures and resourcing on financial statements. 3.1 Budgeted financial statements 3.1.1 Differences between entity resourcing and financial statements There are no material differences between the entity resourcing table and the financial statements. 3.1.2 Explanatory notes and analysis of budgeted financial statements ANSTO s budgeted financial statements are presented on a consolidated basis in accordance with AASB 10 Consolidated Financial Statements . The consolidated financial statements incorporate the assets and liabilities and the results of all entities controlled by ANSTO as defined in AASB 10. In accordance with whole of government reporting for public non financial corporation PNFC entities, these financial statements do not include financials for ANSTO Nuclear Medicine Pty Ltd ANM . Budgeted Departmental Income Statement The statement shows the estimated net cost of services for the organisation. Total expenses in 2022 23 are estimated at 425.7 million compared to the estimated actual for 2021 22 of 439.8 million. Total revenue in 2022 23 is estimated to be 410.7 million including appropriation compared to the estimated actual of 605.2 million for 2021 22. Of the 194.5 million decrease, 164.1 million related to the revaluation of provisions. Budgeted Departmental Balance Sheet This statement shows the estimated end of year financial position of ANSTO. Financial assets decreased from 258.2 million in 2021 22 to 228.6 million in 2022 23. The ANSTO Nuclear Medicine project is reflected in other investments. Budgeted Departmental Statement of Cash Flows Budgeted cash flows, as reflected in the statement of cash flows, provides information on the extent and nature of cash flows by categorising them into expected cash flows from operating, investing and financing activities. The movements in cash flow are consistent with movements in the Income Statement and the Balance Sheet.  Portfolio Budget Statements Australian Nuclear Science and Technology Organisation Page 95 3.2 Budgeted financial statements tables Table 3.1 Comprehensive income statement showing net cost of services for the period ended 30 June 2021 22 Estimated actual 000 2022 23 Budget 000 2023 24 Forward estimate 000 2024 25 Forward estimate 000 2025 26 Forward estimate 000 EXPENSES Employee benefits 158,179 170,821 168,998 169,315 169,315 Suppliers 169,799 139,525 144,242 145,156 139,407 Grants 2,143 3,267 3,267 3,267 3,267 Depreciation and amortisation 94,292 91,131 95,326 102,135 115,597 Finance costs 11,999 20,981 20,981 20,981 20,981 Write down and impairment of assets 3,392 Other expenses 21 Total expense 439,825 425,725 432,814 440,854 448,567 LESS OWN SOURCE INCOME Own source revenue Sale of goods and rendering of service 92,357 88,459 54,671 92,602 92,592 Interest 1,279 930 1,303 1,303 1,303 Rental income 8,741 7,195 7,195 7,195 7,195 Royalties 2,567 4,069 4,069 4,069 4,069 Grants 39,281 18,687 11,262 11,355 11,355 Other 9,907 2,356 2,716 2,623 2,623 Total own source revenue 154,132 121,696 81,216 119,147 119,137 Gains Sale of assets 130 Revaluation of provisions 164,089 Other 7,377 Total gains 171,596 Total own source income 325,728 121,696 81,216 119,147 119,137 Net cost of contribution by services 114,097 304,029 351,598 321,707 329,430 Revenue from Government 279,506 289,027 300,637 283,096 291,495 Surplus deficit attributable to the Australian Government 165,409 15,002 50,961 38,611 37,935 OTHER COMPREHENSIVE INCOME Changes in asset revaluation surplus 22,554 Total other comprehensive income 22,554 Total comprehensive income loss 142,855 15,002 50,961 38,611 37,935 Total comprehensive income loss attributable to the Australian Government 142,855 15,002 50,961 38,611 37,935 Note Impact of net cash appropriation arrangements Total comprehensive income loss as per statement of Comprehensive Income 142,855 15,002 50,961 38,611 37,935 plus depreciation amortisation expenses for ROU assets a 150 147 149 151 28 less lease principal repayments a 206 126 128 121 121 Net Cash Operating Surplus Deficit 142,911 15,023 50,982 38,641 37,842 Prepared on Australian Accounting Standards basis. a Applies leases under AASB 16 Leases.   Portfolio Budget Statements Page 96 Australian Nuclear Science and Technology Organisation Table 3.2 Budgeted departmental balance sheet as at 30 June 2021 22 Estimated actual 000 2022 23 Budget 000 2023 24 Forward estimate 000 2024 25 Forward estimate 000 2025 26 Forward estimate 000 ASSETS Financial assets Cash and cash equivalents 41,076 41,208 45,898 45,898 45,898 Trade and other receivables 31,373 31,265 44,775 44,775 44,775 Other investments 185,000 155,424 119,295 59,910 63,777 Other financial assets 704 704 704 704 704 Total financial assets 258,153 228,601 210,672 151,287 155,154 Non financial assets Land and buildings 333,203 383,424 430,676 451,440 452,518 Property, plant and equipment 871,684 912,176 924,799 893,967 875,221 Intangibles 76,547 72,065 72,286 74,908 77,679 Inventories 41,910 41,910 41,910 41,910 41,910 Tax assets 1,466 1,466 1,466 1,466 1,466 Other non financial assets 21,329 21,329 21,329 21,329 21,329 Total non financial assets 1,346,139 1,432,370 1,492,466 1,485,020 1,470,123 Total assets 1,604,292 1,660,971 1,703,138 1,636,307 1,625,277 LIABILITIES Payables Suppliers 26,676 26,655 26,634 26,604 26,697 Other payables 24,832 24,832 24,832 24,832 24,832 Total payables 51,508 51,487 51,466 51,436 51,529 Interest bearing liabilities Leases 385 396 407 286 165 Total interest bearing liabilities 385 396 407 286 165 Provisions Employee provisions 58,533 58,533 58,533 58,533 58,533 Other provisions 618,911 644,858 689,195 640,737 653,004 Total provisions 677,444 703,391 747,728 699,270 711,537 Total liabilities 729,337 755,274 799,601 750,992 763,231 Net assets 874,955 905,697 903,537 885,315 862,046 EQUITY Parent entity interest Contributed equity 971,521 1,017,265 1,066,066 1,086,455 1,101,121 Reserves 490,235 490,235 490,235 490,235 490,235 Retained surplus accumulated deficit 586,801 601,803 652,764 691,375 729,310 Total parent entity interest 874,955 905,697 903,537 885,315 862,046 Total equity 874,955 905,697 903,537 885,315 862,046 Prepared on Australian Accounting Standards basis. Equity is the residual interest in assets after deduction of liabilities.  Portfolio Budget Statements Australian Nuclear Science and Technology Organisation Page 97 Table 3.3 Departmental statement of changes in equity summary of movement Budget year 2022 23 Retained earnings 000 Asset revaluation reserve 000 Other reserves 000 Contributed equity capital 000 Total equity 000 Opening balance as at 1 July 2022 Balance carried forward from previous period 586,801 480,852 9,383 971,521 874,955 Adjusted opening balance 586,801 480,852 9,383 971,521 874,955 Comprehensive income Surplus deficit for the period 15,002 15,002 Total comprehensive income 15,002 15,002 of which Attributable to the Australian Government 15,002 15,002 Contributions by owners Equity injection appropriation 45,744 45,744 Sub total transactions with owners 45,744 45,744 Estimated closing balance as at 30 June 2023 601,803 480,852 9,383 1,017,265 905,697 Closing balance attributable to the Australian Government 601,803 480,852 9,383 1,017,265 905,697 Prepared on Australian Accounting Standards basis.   Portfolio Budget Statements Page 98 Australian Nuclear Science and Technology Organisation Table 3.4 Budgeted departmental statement of cash flows for the period ended 30 June 2021 22 Estimated actual 000 2022 23 Budget 000 2023 24 Forward estimate 000 2024 25 Forward estimate 000 2025 26 Forward estimate 000 OPERATING ACTIVITIES Cash received Receipts from Government 288,290 299,424 311,358 293,817 302,216 Sale of goods and rendering of services 97,536 96,099 61,866 99,797 99,787 Interest 1,037 930 1,303 1,303 1,303 Other 19,259 14,270 7,326 7,326 7,326 Total cash received 406,122 410,723 381,853 402,243 410,632 Cash used Employees 154,265 170,821 168,998 169,315 169,315 Suppliers 142,220 139,546 144,263 145,186 139,314 Borrowing costs 10 Net GST paid 280 Interest payments on lease liability 33 13 13 13 13 Other 12,124 7,335 7,336 7,336 3,267 Total cash used 308,932 317,715 320,610 321,850 311,909 Net cash from used by operating activities 97,190 93,008 61,243 80,393 98,723 INVESTING ACTIVITIES Cash received Proceeds from advances and loans 108 Proceeds from sales of property, plant and equipment 330 Proceeds from sales of financial instruments 296,360 436,343 423,453 430,000 450,000 Total cash received 296,690 436,451 423,453 430,000 450,000 Cash used Advances and loans made 2,905 13,510 Purchase of property, plant and equipment and intangibles 143,033 168,178 127,845 160,046 109,401 Purchase of financial instruments 290,000 406,767 387,324 370,615 453,867 Total cash used 435,938 574,945 528,679 530,661 563,268 Net cash from used by investing activities 139,248 138,494 105,226 100,661 113,268  Portfolio Budget Statements Australian Nuclear Science and Technology Organisation Page 99 Table 3.4 Budgeted departmental statement of cash flows for the period ended 30 June continued 2021 22 Estimated actual 000 2022 23 Budget 000 2023 24 Forward estimate 000 2024 25 Forward estimate 000 2025 26 Forward estimate 000 FINANCING ACTIVITIES Cash received Contributed equity 50,187 45,744 48,801 20,389 14,666 Total cash received 50,187 45,744 48,801 20,389 14,666 Cash used Principal payments on lease liability 206 126 128 121 121 Total cash used 206 126 128 121 121 Net cash from used by financing activities 49,981 45,618 48,673 20,268 14,545 Net increase decrease in cash held 7,923 132 4,690 Cash and cash equivalents at the beginning of the reporting period 33,153 41,076 41,208 45,898 45,898 Cash and cash equivalents at the end of the reporting period 41,076 41,208 45,898 45,898 45,898 Prepared on Australian Accounting Standards basis.   Portfolio Budget Statements Page 100 Australian Nuclear Science and Technology Organisation Table 3.5 Departmental capital budget statement for the period ended 30 June 2021 22 Estimated actual 000 2022 23 Budget 000 2023 24 Forward estimate 000 2024 25 Forward estimate 000 2025 26 Forward estimate 000 NEW CAPITAL APPROPRIATIONS Equity injections Bill 2 50,187 45,744 48,801 20,389 14,666 Total new capital appropriations 50,187 45,744 48,801 20,389 14,666 Provided for Purchase of non financial assets 50,187 45,744 48,801 20,389 14,666 Total items 50,187 45,744 48,801 20,389 14,666 PURCHASE OF NON FINANCIAL ASSETS Funded by capital appropriations a 50,187 45,744 48,801 20,389 14,666 Funded internally from departmental resources b 86,399 131,481 108,014 74,300 86,034 TOTAL 136,586 177,225 156,815 94,689 100,700 RECONCILIATION OF CASH USED TO ACQUIRE ASSETS TO ASSET MOVEMENT TABLE Total purchases 136,586 177,225 155,283 94,689 100,700 Total cash used to acquire assets 136,586 177,225 155,283 94,689 100,700 Prepared on Australian Accounting Standards basis. a Includes both current Bill 2 and prior Act 2 4 6 appropriations. b Includes the following s74 external receipts sponsorship, subsidy, gifts or similar contribution own source revenue internally developed assets and proceeds from the sale of assets.  Portfolio Budget Statements Australian Nuclear Science and Technology Organisation Page 101 Table 3.6 Statement of departmental asset movements Budget year 2022 23 Land 000 Buildings 000 Other property, plant and equipment 000 Computer software and intangibles 000 Total 000 As at 1 July 2022 Gross book value 201,500 233,643 1,084,854 172,131 1,692,128 Gross book value ROU assets 798 798 Accumulated depreciation amortisation and impairment 102,286 213,170 95,584 411,040 Accumulated depreciation amortisation and impairment ROU assets 452 452 Opening net book balance 201,500 131,703 871,684 76,547 1,281,434 Capital asset additions Estimated expenditure on new or replacement assets By purchase appropriation equity a 59,169 116,056 2,000 177,225 By purchase appropriation equity ROU assets 137 137 Total additions 59,306 116,056 2,000 177,362 Other movements Depreciation amortisation expense 8,938 75,564 6,482 90,984 Depreciation amortisation on ROU assets 147 147 Total other movements 9,085 75,564 6,482 91,131 As at 30 June 2023 Gross book value 201,500 292,812 1,200,910 174,131 1,869,353 Gross book value ROU assets 935 935 Accumulated depreciation amortisation and impairment 111,224 288,734 102,066 502,024 Accumulated depreciation amortisation and impairment ROU assets 599 599 Closing net book balance 201,500 181,924 912,176 72,065 1,367,665 Prepared on Australian Accounting Standards basis. a Appropriation equity refers to equity injections appropriations provided through Appropriation Bill No. 2 2022 23.   Portfolio Budget Statements Page 102 Australian Nuclear Science and Technology Organisation Table 3.7 Schedule of budgeted income and expenses administered on behalf of Government for the period ended 30 June ANSTO has no budgeted income and expenses administered on behalf of Government therefore Table 3.7 is not presented. Table 3.8 Schedule of budgeted assets and liabilities administered on behalf of Government as at 30 June ANSTO has no budgeted assets and liabilities administered on behalf of Government therefore Table 3.8 is not presented. Table 3.9 Schedule of budgeted administered cash flows for the period ended 30 June ANSTO has no budgeted administered cash flows therefore Table 3.9 is not presented. Table 3.10 Schedule of administered capital budget statement for the period ended 30 June ANSTO has no administered capital budget therefore Table 3.10 is not presented. Table 3.11 Statement of administered asset movements Budget year 2022 23 ANSTO has no administered asset movements therefore Table 3.11 is not presented.   103 DEPARTMENT O Commonwealth Scientific and Industrial Research Organisation Entity resources and planned performance   104   105 Commonwealth Scientific and Industrial Research Organisation Section 1 Entity overview and resources 107 1.1 Strategic direction statement 107 1.2 Entity resource statement 109 1.3 Budget measures 110 Section 2 Outcomes and planned performance 111 2.1 Budgeted expenses and performance for Outcome 1 112 Section 3 Budgeted financial statements 119 3.1 Budgeted financial statements 119   106   Commonwealth Scientific and Industrial Research Organisation Page 107 Commonwealth Scientific and Industrial Research Organisation Section 1 Entity overview and resources 1.1 Strategic direction statement The Commonwealth Scientific and Industrial Research Organisation CSIRO is a Corporate Commonwealth entity within the Industry, Science and Resources Portfolio. The organisation s primary functions are set out in the Science and Industry Research Act 1949. Consistent with its legislation, CSIRO aims to deliver scientific and innovative solutions for Australian industry, society and the environment to contribute to national benefit, knowledge and capabilities. In pursuing this outcome, CSIRO embraces its distinct role as the national science agency. This includes delivering large scale, mission directed, multi disciplinary science and technology solutions, while also managing essential national research infrastructure and providing trusted advice to government and industry on challenges of national significance. CSIRO s research programs and commercial services are key mechanisms for delivering excellent science and achieving outcomes aligned with the Australian Government s national science and technology priorities. CSIRO does this by working with government, industry, universities and others in the innovation system, to support existing industries to grow and to create new ones. The capacity to deliver impact is underpinned by investing in and connecting to capabilities that build strength in areas of national need, ensuring Australia has the knowledge, skills and infrastructure required to respond to national and international challenges. Fundamental to CSIRO s impact are the following Through leading science and technology, collaborative relationships and differentiated capability we encourage the translation of Australia s world class scientific research to deliver impactful solutions at scale. Maximising use of national research facilities and collections by Australian and international researchers, as well as by encouraging industry access to relevant research facilities and maintaining collections of national importance.   Portfolio Budget Statements Page 108 Commonwealth Scientific and Industrial Research Organisation Stimulating innovation for Australian industry, academia and government through investments that create new ventures and other outcomes by developing strategic R D partnerships, STEM capability and delivering excellent customer experiences. Establishing a missions program with large scale research initiatives bringing networks of partners and collaborators together with science and infrastructure for deeper, impactful relationships to solve national challenges and build resilience for the future. Establishing stronger connections with top global research and technology peers. Providing the Australian Government with independent scientific and technical advice as required, and informing the policy making process to assist the Government to decide how to best meet the challenges Australia faces. Delivering the CSIRO Innovation Fund to commercialise breakthroughs from CSIRO, universities and publicly funded research for the national interest, by investing in start up and spin off companies, existing small and medium enterprises engaged in translation of research, and company formation opportunities. Maintaining science excellence in CSIRO research to deliver future impact. Promoting careers in science, investing in research training, and improving STEM education, to encourage career opportunities and research endeavours to support school students and teachers to understand how STEM is applied in the real world.  Portfolio Budget Statements Commonwealth Scientific and Industrial Research Organisation Page 109 1.2 Entity resource statement Table 1.1 shows the total funding from all sources available to the entity for its operations and to deliver programs and services on behalf of the Government. The table summarises how resources will be applied by outcome government strategic policy objectives and by administered on behalf of the Government or the public and departmental for the entity s operations classification. Information in this table is presented on a resourcing that is, appropriations cash available basis, whilst the Budgeted expenses by Outcome 1 tables in Section 2 and the financial statements in Section 3 are presented on an accrual basis. Table 1.1 CSIRO resource statement Budget estimates for 2022 23 as at October Budget 2022 2021 22 Estimated actual 000 2022 23 Estimate 000 Opening balance cash reserves at 1 July 496,423 642,276 Funds from Government Annual appropriations ordinary annual services a Outcome 1 949,037 991,134 Annual appropriations other services b Equity injection 4,000 85,528 Total annual appropriations c 953,037 1,076,662 Total funds from Government 953,037 1,076,662 Funds from other sources Interest 2,576 2,255 Royalties 49,674 44,635 Sale of goods and services 453,730 422,928 Rental income 6,850 5,298 Proceeds from asset sales 2,258 70,347 Other 22,763 108,801 Total funds from other sources 537,851 654,264 Total net resourcing for CSIRO 1,987,311 2,373,202 2021 22 2022 23 Average staffing level number 5,001 5,449 All figures shown above are GST exclusive these may not match figures in the cash flow statement. Prepared on a resourcing i.e. appropriations available basis. a Appropriation Bill No. 1 2022 23 and Supply Act No. 1 2022 23. b Appropriation Bill No. 2 2022 23 and Supply Act No. 2 2022 23. c CSIRO is not directly appropriated as it is a corporate Commonwealth entity. Appropriations are made to the Department of Industry, Science and Resources and are then paid to CSIRO and are considered departmental for all purposes.   Portfolio Budget Statements Page 110 Commonwealth Scientific and Industrial Research Organisation 1.3 Budget measures Budget measures in Part 1 relating to CSIRO are detailed in October Budget Paper No. 2 Budget Measures and are summarised below. Table 1.2 CSIRO 2022 23 October Budget measures Part 1 Measures announced since the 2022 23 March Budget Program 2021 22 000 2022 23 000 2023 24 000 2024 25 000 2025 26 000 Payment measures Government Spending Audit Foreign Affairs and Trade efficiencies a 1 Departmental payment 2,126 828 6,648 1,158 Total 2,126 828 6,648 1,158 Responsible Investment to Grow our Regions b c 1 Departmental payment 15,000 Total 15,000 Savings from External Labour, and Savings from Advertising, Travel and Legal Expenses d 1 Departmental payment 5,851 Total 5,851 Supporting Australia s Resources 1 Departmental payment 2,011 364 864 2,143 Total 2,011 364 864 2,143 Total payment measures Departmental 5,012 1,192 7,512 985 Total 5,012 1,192 7,512 985 Prepared on a Government Financial Statistics Underlying Cash basis. Figures displayed as a negative represent a decrease in funds and a positive represent an increase in funds. a The lead entity for this measure is the Department of Foreign Affairs and Trade. The full measure description and package details appear in October Budget Paper No. 2 Budget Measures under the Foreign Affairs and Trade portfolio. b The lead entity for this measure is the Department of Infrastructure, Transport, Regional Development, Communications and the Arts. The full measure description and package details appear in October Budget Paper No. 2 Budget Measures under the Infrastructure, Transport, Regional Development, Communications and the Arts portfolio c Includes 12.0 million in capital funding in 2022 23. d The measure Savings from External Labour, and Savings from Advertising, Travel and Legal Expenses is part of a Cross Portfolio measure. The full measure description and package details appear in October Budget Paper No. 2 Budget Measures under Cross Portfolio.  Portfolio Budget Statements Commonwealth Scientific and Industrial Research Organisation Page 111 Section 2 Outcomes and planned performance Government outcomes are the intended results, impacts or consequences of actions by the Government on the Australian community. Commonwealth programs are the primary vehicle by which government entities achieve the intended results of their outcome statements. Entities are required to identify the programs which contribute to government outcomes over the Budget and forward years. Each outcome is described below together with its related programs. The following provides detailed information on expenses for each outcome and program, further broken down by funding source. Note Performance reporting requirements in the Portfolio Budget Statements are part of the Commonwealth performance framework established by the Public Governance, Performance and Accountability Act 2013. It is anticipated that the performance criteria described in Portfolio Budget Statements will be read with broader information provided in an entity s corporate plans and annual performance statements included in annual reports to provide a complete picture of an entity s planned and actual performance. The most recent corporate plan for CSIRO can be found at The most recent annual performance statement can be found at our impact   Portfolio Budget Statements Page 112 Commonwealth Scientific and Industrial Research Organisation 2.1 Budgeted expenses and performance for Outcome 1 Outcome 1 Innovative scientific and technology solutions to national challenges and opportunities to benefit industry, the environment and the community, through scientific research and capability development, services and advice Linked programs Department of Industry, Science and Resources Programs Program 1.1 Investing in science, technology and commercialisation Program 1.2 Growing innovative and competitive businesses, industries and regions Contribution to Outcome 1 made by linked programs The Department of Industry, Science and Resources contributes to Outcome 1 through its policies and programs supporting science, research and commercialisation, through the operation of the Australian Space Agency, the Office of the Chief Scientist and the Office of Industry Innovation and Science Australia. Department of Climate Change, Energy, the Environment and Water Programs Program 1.1 Reducing Australia s greenhouse gas emissions Program 1.2 Developing clean energy technology Program 2.1 Sustainable Management of Natural Resources and the Environment Program 2.2 Environmental Information and Research Program 3.1 Antarctica Science, Policy and Presence Contribution to Outcome 1 made by linked programs The Department of Climate Change, Energy, the Environment and Water contributes to Outcome 1 through its policies and programs, and the provision of funding, to support science and research in the areas of marine science, greenhouse gas emission reductions, climate science research and clean energy technology, ecology, ecotoxicology, hydrology, hydrogeology, informatics and risk analysis. Department of Agriculture, Fisheries and Forestry Program Program 2.2 Plant and Animal Health Contribution to Outcome 1 made by linked programs The Department of Agriculture, Fisheries and Forestry contributes to Outcome 1 through its contributions to the operating costs of the Australian Centre for Disease Preparedness formerly the Australian Animal Health Laboratory .  Portfolio Budget Statements Commonwealth Scientific and Industrial Research Organisation Page 113 Department of Education Program Program 2.6 Research Capacity Contribution to Outcome 1 made by linked program The Department of Education contributes to Outcome 1 through its policies and programs to invest in Australia s innovation and research capacity, including through the development of Research Infrastructure Investment Plans and National Research Infrastructure Roadmaps. The Department of Education also contributes to Outcome 1 through its education policies and procedures including those to increase the commercialisation of Australian university research outcomes through the Australia s Economic Accelerator program, the Trailblazer Universities program and Industry PhD programs. Bureau of Meteorology Program Program 1.1 Bureau of Meteorology Contribution to Outcome 1 made by linked program The Bureau of Meteorology contributes to Outcome 1 as a Hub partner, and co research organisation, for the Climate Systems Hub to which CSIRO is the host organisation, and as a partner in the Australian Climate Service to deliver world leading climate and natural disaster science, information and expertise. Geoscience Australia Program Program 1 Geoscientific and Spatial Information Services Contribution to Outcome 1 made by linked program Geoscience Australia contributes to Outcome 1 as a partner in earth observation, marine and geological sciences.   Portfolio Budget Statements Page 114 Commonwealth Scientific and Industrial Research Organisation Budgeted expenses for Outcome 1 This table shows how much CSIRO intends to spend on an accrual basis on achieving the outcome, broken down by program, as well as by departmental funding sources. Table 2.1.1 Budgeted expenses for Outcome 1 Outcome 1 Innovative scientific and technology solutions to national challenges and opportunities to benefit industry, the environment and the community, through scientific research and capability development, services and advice 2021 22 Estimated actual 000 2022 23 Budget 000 2023 24 Forward estimate 000 2024 25 Forward estimate 000 2025 26 Forward estimate 000 Program 1 Science and Industrial Research and Infrastructure Revenue from Government Ordinary annual services Appropriation Bill No. 1 949,037 991,134 1,005,563 919,405 931,573 Expenses not requiring appropriation in the budget year a 40,667 39,979 40,797 39,402 37,294 Revenues from other independent sources 386,359 512,145 551,104 585,410 592,315 Total expenses for Program 1 1,376,063 1,543,258 1,597,464 1,544,217 1,561,182 Outcome 1 totals by resource type Revenue from Government Ordinary annual services Appropriation Bill No. 1 949,037 991,134 1,005,563 919,405 931,573 Expenses not requiring appropriation in the budget year a 40,667 39,979 40,797 39,402 37,294 Revenues from other independent sources 386,359 512,145 551,104 585,410 592,315 Total expenses for Outcome 1 1,376,063 1,543,258 1,597,464 1,544,217 1,561,182 Average staffing level number 2021 22 2022 23 5,001 5,449 a Expenses not requiring appropriation in the Budget year consists of approved operating losses. Note Departmental appropriation splits and totals are indicative estimates and may change in the course of the budget year as government priorities change.  Portfolio Budget Statements Commonwealth Scientific and Industrial Research Organisation Page 115 Table 2.1.2 Program components for Outcome 1 Program 1.1 Scientific and Industrial Research and Infrastructure 2021 22 Estimated actual 000 2022 23 Budget 000 2023 24 Forward estimate 000 2024 25 Forward estimate 000 2025 26 Forward estimate 000 Program 1 Science and Industrial Research and Infrastructure Annual departmental expenses Research Science 791,538 824,475 841,919 759,347 786,967 Research National Facilities and Collections 157,499 166,659 163,634 160,058 144,606 Revenues from other independent sources 386,359 512,145 551,104 585,410 592,315 Expenses not requiring appropriation in the Budget year a 40,667 39,979 40,797 39,402 37,294 Total program expenses 1,376,063 1,543,258 1,597,464 1,544,217 1,561,182 a Expenses not requiring appropriation in the Budget year consists of approved operating losses.   Portfolio Budget Statements Page 116 Commonwealth Scientific and Industrial Research Organisation Table 2.1.3 Performance measures for Outcome 1 Table 2.1.3 details the performance measures for each program associated with Outcome 1. It also provides the related key activities as expressed in the current corporate plan where further detail is provided about the delivery of the activities related to the program, the context in which these activities are delivered and how the performance of these activities will be measured. Where relevant, details of 2022 23 October Budget measures that have created new programs or materially changed existing programs are provided. Outcome 1 Innovative scientific and technology solutions to address national challenges and opportunities to benefit industry, the environment and the community, through scientific research and capability development, services and advice Program 1 Scientific and Industrial Research and Infrastructure This program contributes to the outcome by providing scientific solutions, access to world class research facilities and collections, and technical and advisory services to industry and government focusing on identifying pathways for adoption and delivery of impacts. Research programs conduct scientific research aligned to solving the greatest challenges through innovative science and technology, and encourage or facilitate the application and utilisation of results generated from collaborative solutions. The approach is driven by establishing collaborations and multidisciplinary research partnerships with public and private sector organisations, other publicly funded research agencies, universities and schools to integrate the best solution for the public. Underpinned by science excellence and world class talent, research programs also invest in frontier and cross cutting science that reinvents and creates new industries for Australia, accelerating the scale and pace of adoption, while also building the next generation of talent. CSIRO hosts national research facilities and collections on behalf of the scientific community to assist with the delivery of research. This research infrastructure is available for use by the Australian and international research communities and are accessible to industry. Technical, educational and advisory services are also provided to industry, government and the community, which builds and supports capacity to adopt research and innovations, as well as STEM education and training across the national system. In addition, strategic investments are made in scientific research that addresses issues of national priority for Australia through a variety of mechanisms, such as the Science and Industry Endowment Fund SIEF established by Commonwealth legislation, the Science and Industry Endowment Act 1926 , for the purpose of funding research activities, commercialisation of technologies and assistance to industry through research collaboration and capacity building. Key Activities CSIRO delivers Program 1 by Providing advice and solutions that inform and protect society and the environment, help industry competitiveness, and improve the quality of goods and services for industry and consumers. Providing products, and technical and advisory services to industry and government. Managing and operating the national facilities including the Australian Centre for Disease Preparedness, Australia Telescope National Facility, Marine National Facility and Pawsey Supercomputing Centre. Managing and operating the Australian national research collections including the Australian National Fish Collection, Australian National Insect Collection, Australian National Herbarium, Australian National Wildlife Collection, National Tree Seed Collection, National Algae Culture Collection, and the Atlas of Living Australia, the portal to the collections, providing free online access. Ensuring access, both nationally and internationally, to the national facilities and collections for the research community.  Portfolio Budget Statements Commonwealth Scientific and Industrial Research Organisation Page 117 Collaborating with businesses including large corporations and small and medium enterprises , public sector organisations Federal, State and Local and other publicly funded research agencies PFRAs , universities, Cooperative Research Centres and Research Development Corporations. Investing in proposals from universities, PFRAs and their partners to bring forward the commercialisation of research based solutions aligned with the Government s Science and Research Priorities. Administering the Innovation Fund to support start up businesses and a culture of innovation and entrepreneurship in Australia. Education and outreach activities to develop increased knowledge of science and its applications for students, teachers and the Australian community. Investing in science that contributes to Australia s sustainable future, progresses experimental research and technology development, supports substantial scale research activities in the field of information and communications technology, and programs that attract students into STEM at school, and higher and vocational education. Investing SIEF funds in programs aligned with published strategic objectives that address national challenges and contribute to Australia s sustainable future. Year Performance measures Expected Performance Results Prior year 2021 22 Demonstrated value of benefits underpinned by an increasing annual portfolio of externally validated impact case studies capturing triple bottom line impacts Case studies Achieved 25 case studies were completed Return on investment Achieved The report this year estimated an 8.4 1 return on investment, indicating that for every 1 invested in CSIRO, at least 8.40 in value is returned to the Australian people. The 2022 portfolio benefit cost ratio BCR of 8.4 is higher than the 7.6 BCR reported in the 2020 value report. Use of the national facilities and collections as measured through successful astronomical observations, supercomputer core hour use, outward loans of collections, and successful marine research days delivered. Astronomical observations Not achieved 68 2 off target Pawsey supercomputer Achieved 94.4 4.4 exceeded target Collections Achieved 70 met target Marine National Facilities Not achieved 80 10 off target Year Performance measures Planned Performance Results Budget Year 2022 23 Demonstrated uptake and adoption through Total annual IP revenue Value of CSIRO s equity holdings Impact by alignment, design, and scale through Externally validated assessments of triple bottom line impacts from a cross section of the science areas reported annually Benefit cost ratio CSIRO s investment in Missions IP revenue 39m Equity holdings 150m Minimum of 20 externally validated case studies At least 1.5b worth of net present value delivered per annum Investment in Missions 140m   Portfolio Budget Statements Page 118 Commonwealth Scientific and Industrial Research Organisation Budget Year 2022 23 Use of the national facilities and collections as measured through successful astronomical observations, supercomputer core hour use, outward loans of collections, and successful marine research days delivered. Minimum of 70 successful astronomical observations. 90 core hours on Pawsey supercomputer facility. 70 outward loans of collections averaged over 5 years . Minimum of 90 successful research days delivered on Marine National Facilities. Forward Estimate 2023 24 Demonstrated uptake and adoption through Total annual IP revenue Value of CSIRO s equity holdings Impact by alignment, design, and scale through Externally validated assessments of triple bottom line impacts from a cross section of the science areas reported annually Benefit cost ratio CSIRO s investment in Missions IP revenue 40m Equity holdings 200m Minimum of 20 externally validated case studies. Investment in Missions 180m Use of the national facilities and collections as measured through successful astronomical observations, supercomputer core hour use, outward loans of collections, and successful marine research days delivered Minimum of 70 successful astronomical observations. 90 core hours on Pawsey supercomputer facility. 70 outward loans of collections averaged over 5 years . Minimum of 90 successful research days delivered on Marine National Facilities. Forward Estimates 2024 26 Demonstrated uptake and adoption through Total annual IP revenue Value of CSIRO s equity holdings Impact by alignment, design, and scale through Externally validated assessments of triple bottom line impacts from a cross section of the science areas reported annually Benefit cost ratio CSIRO s investment in Missions IP revenue 42m Equity holdings 220m Minimum of 20 externally validated case studies At least 2b worth of net present value delivered per annum Investment in Missions 230m then maintain or increase Use of the national facilities and collections as measured through successful astronomical observations, supercomputer core hour use, outward loans of collections, and successful marine research days delivered Minimum of 70 successful astronomical observations. 90 core hours on Pawsey supercomputer facility. 70 outward loans of collections averaged over 5 years . Minimum of 90 successful research days delivered on Marine National Facilities Material changes to Program 1 resulting from 2022 23 October Budget Measures Nil  Portfolio Budget Statements Commonwealth Scientific and Industrial Research Organisation Page 119 Section 3 Budgeted financial statements Section 3 presents budgeted financial statements which provide a comprehensive snapshot of entity finances for the 2022 23 Budget year, including the impact of Budget measures and resourcing on financial statements. 3.1 Budgeted financial statements 3.1.1 Differences between entity resourcing and financial statements The entity resource statement is prepared on a cash basis and provides a view of cash appropriations resources available to CSIRO, whilst the financial statements are prepared on an accrual basis. 3.1.2 Explanatory notes and analysis of budgeted financial statements The budgeted consolidated financial statements comprise the financial statements of the CSIRO and its subsidiaries. CSIRO has several subsidiaries, including the Science and Industry Endowment Fund SIEF , the CSIRO Chile Research Fundacin Fundacin , National ICT Australia NICTA , the Innovation Fund entities and the US Office entities. Budgeted Departmental Income Statement The revenue from Government estimate for 2022 23 is 991.1 million. This is a decrease from the 991.3 million reported in the 2022 23 March Budget. CSIRO is expecting an operating surplus in 2022 23, 2024 25 and 2025 26 predominantly due to revenue funding for the purchase of non financial assets. CSIRO is expecting an operating loss in 2023 24 due to the distribution of funds by the Science and Industry Endowment Fund and unfunded depreciation expenses relating to assets for which capital was previously provided by the Government. Budgeted Departmental Balance Sheet Other investments are estimated to increase in 2022 23 and the forward estimates as a result of the Expand the CSIRO Innovation Fund Main Sequence Ventures measure in the 2022 23 March Budget. Land and buildings are estimated to decrease in 2023 24 and 2025 26 due to planned site divestment in line with the CSIRO 2019 29 Property Strategy and leased assets depreciating at a higher rate as the leases near their close. Property, plant and equipment assets are estimated to increase in 2022 23 from 2021 22 due to an increase in budgeted asset transfers.   Portfolio Budget Statements Page 120 Commonwealth Scientific and Industrial Research Organisation Departmental Capital Budget Statement The budgeted internally funded capital expenditure relates to construction of new, and refurbishment of existing, buildings and purchase of plant and equipment, including scientific equipment and information technology related assets. The total capital budget estimate for 2022 23 is 279.5 million, an increase from the 180.6 million reported in the 2022 23 March Budget. The movement is mainly due to moving unspent funds into 2022 23 from 2021 22 and an increase in estimated income including external revenue and gains for the purchase of assets.  Portfolio Budget Statements Commonwealth Scientific and Industrial Research Organisation Page 121 3.2 Budgeted financial statements tables Table 3.1 Comprehensive income statement showing net cost of services for the period ended 30 June 2021 22 Estimated actual 000 2022 23 Budget 000 2023 24 Forward estimate 000 2024 25 Forward estimate 000 2025 26 Forward estimate 000 EXPENSES Employee benefits 754,805 863,327 874,408 874,744 874,898 Suppliers 436,752 503,048 547,253 495,230 512,568 Depreciation and amortisation 173,984 176,030 175,232 173,775 173,346 Finance costs 1,491 853 571 468 370 Write down and impairment of assets 1,487 Losses from asset sales 10,518 Total expenses 1,376,063 1,543,258 1,597,464 1,544,217 1,561,182 LESS OWN SOURCE INCOME Own source revenue Sale of goods and rendering of services 417,255 449,948 477,864 498,326 496,816 Interest 3,425 2,196 2,686 4,711 7,526 Rental income 6,850 5,298 8,521 7,984 7,984 Royalties and licence fees 49,674 44,635 47,860 50,260 50,260 Other revenue 20,988 108,801 39,868 127,229 38,329 Total own source revenue 498,192 610,878 576,799 688,510 600,915 Gains Gain loss on foreign exchange 292 Sale of assets 814 10,500 10,500 10,500 38,500 Other 53,647 39,874 Total gains 54,753 50,374 10,500 10,500 38,500 Total own source income 552,945 661,252 587,299 699,010 639,415 Net cost of contribution by services 823,118 882,006 1,010,165 845,207 921,767 Revenue from Government 949,037 991,134 1,005,563 919,405 931,573 Surplus deficit attributable to the Australian Government 125,919 109,128 4,602 74,198 9,806 Total comprehensive income loss attributable to the Australian Government 125,919 109,128 4,602 74,198 9,806 Note Impact of net cash appropriation arrangements Total comprehensive income loss as per statement of Comprehensive Income 125,919 109,128 4,602 74,198 9,806 plus depreciation amortisation expenses on ROU assets a 30,175 15,840 15,604 14,803 15,129 less lease principal repayments a 17,363 18,584 14,088 14,342 12,901 Net Cash Operating Surplus Deficit 138,731 106,384 3,086 74,659 12,034 a Applies leases under AASB 16 Leases. Prepared on Australian Accounting Standards basis.   Portfolio Budget Statements Page 122 Commonwealth Scientific and Industrial Research Organisation Table 3.2 Budgeted departmental balance sheet as at 30 June 2021 22 Estimated actual 000 2022 23 Budget 000 2023 24 Forward estimate 000 2024 25 Forward estimate 000 2025 26 Forward estimate 000 ASSETS Financial assets Cash and equivalents 642,276 659,801 655,170 610,662 776,319 Trade and other receivables 104,092 104,053 104,063 104,063 104,063 Other investments 283,153 328,153 373,153 418,153 436,153 Total financial assets 1,029,521 1,092,007 1,132,386 1,132,878 1,316,535 Non financial assets Land and buildings 1,540,912 1,568,246 1,540,468 1,560,627 1,402,469 Property, plant and equipment 563,542 661,468 678,476 767,365 760,203 Heritage and cultural assets 9,952 9,952 9,952 9,952 9,952 Investment property 50,748 50,748 50,748 50,748 50,748 Intangibles 18,502 19,176 19,850 20,524 21,210 Inventories 1,290 1,290 1,290 1,290 1,290 Other non financial assets 11,886 11,886 11,886 11,886 11,886 Total non financial assets 2,196,832 2,322,766 2,312,670 2,422,392 2,257,758 Assets held for sale 40,530 Total assets 3,266,883 3,414,773 3,445,056 3,555,270 3,574,293 LIABILITIES Payables Suppliers 310,897 283,855 283,855 283,855 283,855 Other payables 18,357 18,357 18,357 18,357 18,357 Deposits 19,419 19,419 19,419 19,419 19,419 Total payables 348,673 321,631 321,631 321,631 321,631 Interest bearing liabilities Lease liabilities 63,652 46,928 33,713 20,673 11,890 Total Interest bearing liabilities 63,652 46,928 33,713 20,673 11,890 Provisions Employee provisions 226,452 226,452 226,452 226,452 226,452 Other provisions 65,366 62,366 59,366 56,366 53,366 Total provisions 291,818 288,818 285,818 282,818 279,818 Total liabilities 704,143 657,377 641,162 625,122 613,339 Net assets 2,562,740 2,757,396 2,803,894 2,930,148 2,960,954 EQUITY Parent entity equity Contributed equity 331,384 416,912 468,012 520,068 541,068 Reserves 1,595,206 1,595,206 1,595,206 1,595,206 1,595,206 Retained surplus accumulated deficit 636,150 745,278 740,676 814,874 824,680 Total parent entity equity interest 2,562,740 2,757,396 2,803,894 2,930,148 2,960,954 Total equity 2,562,740 2,757,396 2,803,894 2,930,148 2,960,954 Prepared on Australian Accounting Standards basis. Equity is the residual interest in assets after deduction of liabilities.  Portfolio Budget Statements Commonwealth Scientific and Industrial Research Organisation Page 123 Table 3.3 Departmental statement of changes in equity summary of movement Budget year 2022 23 Retained earnings 000 Asset revaluation reserve 000 Other reserves 000 Contributed equity capital 000 Total equity 000 Opening balance as at 1 July 2022 Balance carried forward from previous period 636,150 1,595,506 300 331,384 2,562,740 Adjusted opening balance 636,150 1,595,506 300 331,384 2,562,740 Comprehensive income Surplus deficit for the period 109,128 109,128 Total comprehensive income 109,128 109,128 of which Attributable to the Australian Government 109,128 109,128 Transactions with owners Contributions by owners Equity injection appropriation 85,528 85,528 Sub total transactions with owners 85,528 85,528 Estimated closing balance as at 30 June 2023 745,278 1,595,506 300 416,912 2,757,396 Closing balance attributable to the Australian Government 745,278 1,595,506 300 416,912 2,757,396 Prepared on Australian Accounting Standards basis.   Portfolio Budget Statements Page 124 Commonwealth Scientific and Industrial Research Organisation Table 3.4 Budgeted departmental statement of cash flows for the period ended 30 June 2021 22 Estimated actual 000 2022 23 Budget 000 2023 24 Forward estimate 000 2024 25 Forward estimate 000 2025 26 Forward estimate 000 OPERATING ACTIVITIES Cash received Receipts from Government 949,037 991,134 1,005,563 919,405 931,573 Sale of goods and rendering of services 595,607 649,559 635,249 755,929 670,888 Interest 2,576 2,255 2,686 4,711 7,526 Net GST received 13,202 Total cash received 1,560,422 1,642,948 1,643,498 1,680,045 1,609,987 Cash used Employees 790,565 863,327 874,408 874,744 874,898 Suppliers 461,813 556,867 605,143 548,008 566,859 Finance costs 110 Net GST paid 17,120 6,256 22,352 26,208 Interest payments on lease liabilities 1,381 853 571 468 370 Other 2,381 Total cash used 1,256,250 1,438,167 1,486,378 1,445,572 1,468,335 Net cash from used by operating activities 304,172 204,781 157,120 234,473 141,652 INVESTING ACTIVITIES Cash received Proceeds from sales of property, plant and equipment 1,364 70,347 37,500 37,500 181,600 Proceeds from sales of financial instruments 814 Total cash received 2,178 70,347 37,500 37,500 181,600 Cash used Purchase of property, plant and equipment and intangibles 130,370 279,547 191,263 309,195 147,694 Purchase of financial instruments 16,724 45,000 45,000 45,000 18,000 Investments 40 Total cash used 147,134 324,547 236,263 354,195 165,694 Net cash from used by investing activities 144,956 254,200 198,763 316,695 15,906  Portfolio Budget Statements Commonwealth Scientific and Industrial Research Organisation Page 125 Table 3.4 Budgeted departmental statement of cash flows for the period ended 30 June continued 2021 22 Estimated actual 000 2022 23 Budget 000 2023 24 Forward estimate 000 2024 25 Forward estimate 000 2025 26 Forward estimate 000 FINANCING ACTIVITIES Cash received Contributed equity 4,000 85,528 51,100 52,056 21,000 Total cash received 4,000 85,528 51,100 52,056 21,000 Cash used Principal payments on lease liabilities 17,363 18,584 14,088 14,342 12,901 Total cash used 17,363 18,584 14,088 14,342 12,901 Net cash from used by financing activities 13,363 66,944 37,012 37,714 8,099 Net increase decrease in cash held 145,853 17,525 4,631 44,508 165,657 Cash and cash equivalents at the beginning of the reporting period 496,423 642,276 659,801 655,170 610,662 Cash and cash equivalents at the end of the reporting period 642,276 659,801 655,170 610,662 776,319 Prepared on Australian Accounting Standards basis.   Portfolio Budget Statements Page 126 Commonwealth Scientific and Industrial Research Organisation Table 3.5 Departmental capital budget statement for the period ended 30 June 2021 22 Estimated actual 000 2022 23 Budget 000 2023 24 Forward estimate 000 2024 25 Forward estimate 000 2025 26 Forward estimate 000 NEW CAPITAL APPROPRIATIONS Equity injections Bill 2 4,000 85,528 51,100 52,056 21,000 Total new capital appropriations 4,000 85,528 51,100 52,056 21,000 Provided for Purchase of non financial assets 36,528 2,100 3,056 2,000 Other Items 4,000 49,000 49,000 49,000 19,000 Total Items 4,000 85,528 51,100 52,056 21,000 PURCHASE OF NON FINANCIAL ASSETS Funded by capital appropriations a 36,528 2,100 3,056 2,000 Funded internally from departmental resources b 130,370 243,019 189,163 306,139 145,694 TOTAL 130,370 279,547 191,263 309,195 147,694 RECONCILIATION OF CASH USED TO ACQUIRE ASSETS TO ASSET MOVEMENT TABLE Total purchases 156,491 321,281 192,136 310,497 151,812 less ROU Additions 8,274 1,860 873 1,302 4,118 less gifted assets 17,847 39,874 Total cash used to acquire assets 130,370 279,547 191,263 309,195 147,694 Prepared on Australian Accounting Standards basis. a Includes both current Bill 2 and prior Act 2 4 6 appropriations. b Includes the following sources of funding current Bill 1 and prior year Act 1 3 5 appropriations internally developed assets donations and contributions own source revenue receipts and proceeds from the sale of assets.   Portfolio Budget Statements 127 Table 3.6 Statement of departmental asset movements Budget year 2022 23 Land 000 Buildings 000 Property, plant and equipment 000 Heritage and cultural 000 Investment property 000 Intangibles 000 Land held for sale 000 Total 000 As at 1 July 2022 Gross book value 380,974 2,732,907 1,375,788 150,061 50,748 62,623 40,530 4,793,631 Gross book value ROU assets 291,122 4,468 295,590 Accumulated depreciation amortisation and impairment 1,698,408 814,204 140,109 44,121 2,696,842 Accumulated depreciation amortisation and impairment ROU assets 165,683 2,510 168,193 Opening net book balance 380,974 1,159,938 563,542 9,952 50,748 18,502 40,530 2,224,186 Capital asset additions Estimated expenditure on new or replacement assets By purchase appropriation equity a 36,528 36,528 By purchase appropriation ordinary annual services b 37,791 61,310 4,000 103,101 By purchase appropriation ordinary annual services ROU assets 1,177 683 1,860 By purchase other 102,136 37,782 139,918 Assets received as gifts donations 3,937 35,937 39,874 Total additions 145,041 172,240 4,000 321,281 Other movements Depreciation amortisation expense 83,514 73,350 3,326 160,190 Depreciation amortisation on ROU assets 14,876 964 15,840 Disposals 19,317 40,530 59,847 Total other movements 19,317 98,390 74,314 3,326 40,530 235,877   Portfolio Budget Statements 128 Table 3.6 Statement of departmental asset movements 2022 23 Budget year continued Land 000 Buildings 000 Property, plant and equipment 000 Heritage and cultural 000 Investment property 000 Intangibles 000 Land held for sale 000 Total 000 As at 30 June 2023 Gross book value 361,657 2,876,771 1,547,345 150,061 50,748 66,623 5,053,205 Gross book value ROU assets 292,299 5,151 297,450 Accumulated depreciation amortisation and impairment 1,781,922 887,554 140,109 47,447 2,857,032 Accumulated depreciation amortisation and impairment ROU assets 180,559 3,474 184,033 Closing net book balance 361,657 1,206,589 661,468 9,952 50,748 19,176 2,309,590 Prepared on Australian Accounting Standards basis. a Appropriation equity refers to equity injections appropriations provided through Supply Act No. 2 2022 23 and Appropriation Bill No. 2 2022 23. b Appropriation ordinary annual services refers to funding provided through Supply Act No. 1 2022 23 and Appropriation Bill No. 1 2022 23 for depreciation amortisation expenses.  Portfolio Budget Statements Commonwealth Scientific and Industrial Research Organisation Page 129 Table 3.7 Schedule of budgeted income and expenses administered on behalf of Government for the period ended 30 June CSIRO has no budgeted income and expenses administered on behalf of Government therefore Table 3.7 is not presented. Table 3.8 Schedule of budgeted assets and liabilities administered on behalf of Government as at 30 June CSIRO has no budgeted assets and liabilities administered on behalf of Government therefore Table 3.8 is not presented. Table 3.9 Schedule of budgeted administered cash flows for the period ended 30 June CSIRO has no budgeted administered cash flows therefore Table 3.9 is not presented. Table 3.10 Schedule of administered capital budget statement for the period ended 30 June CSIRO has no administered capital budget therefore Table 3.10 is not presented. Table 3.11 Statement of administered asset movements Budget year 2022 23 CSIRO has no administered asset movements therefore Table 3.11 is not presented.   130   131 DEPARTMENT O Geoscience Australia Entity resources and planned performance   132   133 Geoscience Australia Section 1 Entity overview and resources 135 1.1 Strategic direction statement 135 1.2 Entity resource statement 137 1.3 Budget measures 138 Section 2 Outcomes and planned performance 139 2.1 Budgeted expenses and performance for Outcome 1 140 Section 3 Budgeted financial statements 144 3.1 Budgeted financial statements 144   134   Geoscience Australia Page 135 Geoscience Australia Section 1 Entity overview and resources 1.1 Strategic direction statement Geoscience Australia is the national public sector geoscience organisation. Its purpose is to be the trusted advisor on Earth sciences to inform government, community and industry decision making. This contributes to a strong economy, resilient society and sustainable environment. During the Budget and forward years, Geoscience Australia will implement and progress Australian Government priorities and key Budget measures. Through the Positioning Australia program, Geoscience Australia is implementing a national system for open, reliable and high accuracy positioning across Australia. A national network of ground stations and a Satellite Based Augmentation System will deliver positioning data accurate to 10 cm across Australia, and 3 to 5 cm in areas of mobile phone coverage. The 4 year 2020 2024 , 124.5 million Exploring for the Future phase two program will continue to deliver high quality data and information that improves the understanding of the nation s resource potential. This is driving the next generation of mineral, energy, and groundwater discoveries in Australia that will underpin Australia s path to net zero, attract investment, generate jobs and secure the resources we need into the future. Over 4 years from 2020 21, Geoscience Australia is delivering the 30.9 million Data Driven Discoveries initiative. Geoscience Australia is collating and applying modern analysis techniques to reprocess old geoscientific information and data, some from as far back as the 1960s, and will be collecting new geoscientific data to deepen our knowledge of a key underexplored area of south west Queensland. The program will help discover potential for hydrogen storage, critical minerals, groundwater, and carbon capture and storage, stimulating new investments in the region. Geoscience Australia has partnered with the Bureau of Meteorology, CSIRO, and the Australian Bureau of Statistics to establish the Australian Climate Service. Funding announced in May 2021 of 209.7 million over 4 years to establish the Australian Climate Service is supporting better connection and leveraging of the Government s extensive data, information and capabilities to inform climate and disaster risk management.   Portfolio Budget Statements Page 136 Geoscience Australia In the 2021 22 Budget, the Australian Government committed 40.2 million over 4 years to develop a Digital Atlas of Australia. The Digital Atlas of Australia will be a free, interactive geospatial map that will provide valuable data on Australia s population, economy, employment, infrastructure, health, land and the environment. This will support governments, businesses and the community to make more informed decisions about planning, infrastructure and investment at the local and national level. Geoscience Australia is continuing to support implementation of the Australian Government s Civil Space Strategy by helping ensure the benefits of space data are realised on Earth, including through its work to connect the space and spatial sectors of the economy. The organisation is working with the Australian Space Agency and other partners to support implementation of the Earth Observations from Space Technology Roadmap, a document that provides the Australian space industry with guidance on opportunities for satellite technology development. In 2022, Geoscience Australia is working with the Australian Space Agency to develop an equivalent technology roadmap for Positioning, Navigation and Timing. Through the Digital Earth Australia program, Geoscience Australia will continue to provide free and open satellite data and derived information products to support Australian governments to make better decisions on policy, investment, management and operations, and Australian industry and business to create new capabilities that increase efficiency, productivity and employment opportunities across the Australian economy. As part of the Australian Government s National Critical Minerals Research and Development Hub, funding of 9.4 million has been allocated to Geoscience Australia over 4 years in the 2022 23 October Budget to undertake research that will identify benefits to Australia s critical mineral sector. The Hub is providing a national perspective to critical minerals research and development and is addressing technical challenges by bringing together Australia s world leading research capabilities of Geoscience Australia, CSIRO, and the Australian Nuclear Science and Technology Organisation. Geoscience Australia will achieve its impacts with a focus on science excellence, optimising its data, fostering collaboration and strong partnerships, and providing a more diverse and inclusive workplace.  Portfolio Budget Statements Geoscience Australia Page 137 1.2 Entity resource statement Table 1.1 shows the total funding from all sources available to the entity for its operations and to deliver programs and services on behalf of the Government. The table summarises how resources will be applied by outcome government strategic policy objectives and by administered on behalf of the Government or the public and departmental for the entity s operations classification. For more detailed information on special accounts and special appropriations, please refer to Budget Paper No. 4 Agency Resourcing. Information in this table is presented on a resourcing that is, appropriations cash available basis, whilst the Budgeted expenses by Outcome 1 tables in Section 2 and the financial statements in Section 3 are presented on an accrual basis. Table 1.1 Geoscience Australia resource statement Budget estimates for 2022 23 as at October Budget 2022 2021 22 Estimated actual 000 2022 23 Estimate 000 Departmental Annual appropriations ordinary annual services a Prior year appropriations available 106,286 211,150 Departmental appropriation b 260,052 331,897 s74 external revenue c 30,423 66,288 Departmental capital budget d 4,583 7,692 Prior year appropriation available 8,074 8,074 Equity injection e 7,127 9,594 Total departmental annual appropriations 416,545 634,695 Total departmental resourcing 416,545 634,695 Administered Annual appropriations ordinary annual services a Grant 19 19 Total administered annual appropriations 19 19 Total administered resourcing 19 19 Total resourcing for Geoscience Australia 416,564 634,714 2021 22 2022 23 Average staffing level number 592 603 All figures shown above are GST exclusive these may not match figures in the cash flow statement. Prepared on a resourcing i.e. appropriations available basis. a Appropriation Bill No. 1 2022 23, Supply Bill No. 3 2022 23 and Supply Act No. 1 2022 23. b Excludes departmental capital budget DCB . c Estimated external revenue receipts under section 74 of the PGPA Act. d Departmental capital budgets are not separately identified in Appropriation Bill No.1 and form part of ordinary annual services items. Please refer to Table 3.5 for further details. For accounting purposes, this amount has been designated as a contribution by owner . e Appropriation Bill No. 2 2022 23.   Portfolio Budget Statements Page 138 Geoscience Australia 1.3 Budget measures Budget measures in Part 1 relating to Geoscience Australia are detailed in October Budget Paper No. 2 Budget Measures and are summarised below. Table 1.2 Geoscience Australia 2022 23 October Budget measures Part 1 Measures announced since the 2022 23 March Budget Program 2021 22 000 2022 23 000 2023 24 000 2024 25 000 2025 26 000 Payment Measures An Ambitious and Enduring APS Reform Plan a 1 Departmental payment 122 309 324 Total 122 309 324 Savings from External Labour, and Savings from Advertising, Travel and Legal Expenses b 1 Departmental payment 11,633 Total 11,633 Supporting Australia s Resources 1 Departmental payment 2,676 142 640 2,081 Total 2,676 142 640 2,081 Total payment measures Departmental 14,431 451 316 2,081 Total 14,431 451 316 2,081 Prepared on a Government Finance Statistics Underlying Cash basis. Figures displayed as a negative represent a decrease in funds and a positive represent an increase in funds. a The lead entity for measure An Ambitious and Enduring APS Reform Plan is the Department of the Prime Minister and Cabinet. The full measure description and package details appear in October Budget Paper No. 2 Budget Measures under the Prime Minister and Cabinet Portfolio. b The measure Savings from External Labour, and Savings from Advertising, Travel and Legal Expenses is part of a Cross Portfolio measure. The full measure description and package details appear in October Budget Paper No. 2 Budget Measures under Cross Portfolio.  Portfolio Budget Statements Geoscience Australia Page 139 Section 2 Outcomes and planned performance Government outcomes are the intended results, impacts or consequences of actions by the Government on the Australian community. Commonwealth programs are the primary vehicle by which government entities achieve the intended results of their outcome statements. Entities are required to identify the programs which contribute to government outcomes over the Budget and forward years. Each outcome is described below together with its related programs. The following provides detailed information on expenses for each outcome and program, further broken down by funding source. Note Performance reporting requirements in the Portfolio Budget Statements are part of the Commonwealth performance framework established by the Public Governance, Performance and Accountability Act 2013. It is anticipated that the performance criteria described in Portfolio Budget Statements will be read with broader information provided in an entity s corporate plans and annual performance statements included in annual reports to provide a complete picture of an entity s planned and actual performance. The most recent corporate plan for Geoscience Australia can be found at The most recent annual performance statement can be found at   Portfolio Budget Statements Page 140 Geoscience Australia 2.1 Budgeted expenses and performance for Outcome 1 Outcome 1 Informed government, industry and community decisions on the economic, social and environmental management of the nation s natural resources through enabling access to geoscientific and spatial information Linked programs Department of Industry, Science and Resources Programs Program 1.1 Investing in science, technology and commercialisation Program 1.2 Growing innovative and competitive businesses, industries and regions Program 1.3 Supporting a strong resources sector Contribution to Outcome 1 made by linked programs The Department of Industry, Science and Resources contributes to Outcome 1 through its policies and programs supporting science, commercialisation, the sustainable development of the resources sector, and encouraging innovative technologies. Bureau of Meteorology Program Program 1.1 Bureau of Meteorology Contribution to Outcome 1 made by linked program The Bureau of Meteorology partners with Geoscience Australia to provide the Joint Australian Tsunami Warning Centre and to deliver world leading science, information, and expertise on climate and natural disaster risk through the Australian Climate Service. Commonwealth Scientific and Industrial Research Organisation Program Program 1.1 Scientific and Industrial Research and Infrastructure Contribution to Outcome 1 made by linked program CSIRO partners with Geoscience Australia to progress the Australian Space Agency s Earth Observation from Space Technology Roadmap, as part of the Advancing Space Australian Civil Space Strategy 2019 28.  Portfolio Budget Statements Geoscience Australia Page 141 Budgeted expenses for Outcome 1 This table shows how much Geoscience Australia intends to spend on an accrual basis on achieving the outcome, broken down by program, as well as by administered and departmental funding sources. Table 2.1.1 Budgeted expenses for Outcome 1 Outcome 1 Informed government, industry and community decisions on the economic, social and environmental management of the nation s natural resources through enabling access to geoscientific and spatial information 2021 22 Estimated actual 000 2022 23 Budget 000 2023 24 Forward estimate 000 2024 25 Forward estimate 000 2025 26 Forward estimate 000 Program 1 Geoscientific and Spatial Information Services Administered expenses Ordinary annual services Appropriation Bill No. 1 19 19 19 19 Administered total 19 19 19 19 Departmental expenses Departmental appropriation 195,362 331,897 315,971 277,915 268,934 s74 external revenue a 35,250 71,567 55,168 50,703 49,016 Expenses not requiring appropriation in the Budget year b 14,536 13,879 12,841 12,161 10,963 Departmental total 245,148 417,343 383,980 340,779 328,913 Total expenses for program 1.1 245,148 417,362 383,999 340,798 328,932 Outcome 1 Totals by appropriation type Administered expenses Ordinary annual services Appropriation Bill No. 1 19 19 19 19 Administered total 19 19 19 19 Departmental expenses Departmental appropriation 195,362 331,897 315,971 277,915 268,934 s74 external revenue a 35,250 71,567 55,168 50,703 49,016 Expenses not requiring appropriation in the Budget year b 14,536 13,879 12,841 12,161 10,963 Departmental total 245,148 417,343 383,980 340,779 328,913 Total expenses for Outcome 1 245,148 417,362 383,999 340,798 328,932 2021 22 2022 23 Average staffing level number 592 603 a Estimated expenses incurred in relation to receipts retained under section 74 of the PGPA Act 2013. b Expenses not requiring appropriation in the Budget years are made up of depreciation expenses, amortisation expenses, make good expenses, audit fees and accounting treatment of accommodation lease expenses. Note Departmental appropriation splits and totals are indicative estimates and may change in the course of the Budget year as government priorities change.   Portfolio Budget Statements Page 142 Geoscience Australia Table 2.1.2 Performance measure for Outcome 1 Table 2.1.2 details the performance measures for each program associated with Outcome 1. It also provides the related key activities as expressed in the current corporate plan where further detail is provided about the delivery of the activities related to the program, the context in which these activities are delivered and how the performance of these activities will be measured. Where relevant, details of 2022 23 October Budget measures that have created new programs or materially changed existing programs are provided. Outcome 1 Informed government, industry and community decisions on the economic, social and environmental management of the nation s natural resources through enabling access to geoscientific and spatial information Program 1 Geoscientific and Spatial Information Services This program contributes to the outcome by providing trusted information and advice on Australia s geology and geography to support faster and smarter decision making. Key Activities Geoscience Australia s key activities, as reported in its corporate plan, are based on delivering value across 6 areas of national interest. Geoscience Australia s key activities Building Australia s resources wealth Supporting Australia s community safety Securing Australia s water resources Managing Australia s marine jurisdictions Creating a location enabled Australia Enabling an informed Australia Year Performance measures Expected Performance Results Prior Year 2021 22 Geoscience Australia s products and services are underpinned by quality science, are fit for purpose and meet stakeholder needs. Geoscience Australia delivered a range of valued products and services that were fit for purpose, based on quality science and met stakeholder needs. The development and delivery of Geoscience Australia s work was guided by its science strategy and founded on the principles of science excellence. Geoscience Australia delivered information on Australia s geology and geography to inform government, industry and community decision making. This work provided an evidence base to support decisions regarding the nation s use of natural resources, the management of the environment, and community safety.  Portfolio Budget Statements Geoscience Australia Page 143 Year Performance measures Planned Performance Results Budget Year 2022 23 Geoscience Australia s products and services are underpinned by quality science, are fit for purpose and meet stakeholder needs. On track Geoscience Australia continues to deliver a range of valued products and services that are fit for purpose, based on quality science and meet stakeholder needs. The development and delivery of Geoscience Australia s work is guided by its science strategy and founded on the principles of science excellence. Geoscience Australia is delivering information on Australia s geology and geography to inform government, industry and community decision making. This work provides an evidence base to support decisions regarding the nation s use of natural resources, the management of the environment and community safety. Forward Estimates 2023 26 As per 2022 23. As per 2022 23. Material changes to Program 1 resulting from 2022 23 October Budget Measures Nil   Portfolio Budget Statements Page 144 Geoscience Australia Section 3 Budgeted financial statements Section 3 presents budgeted financial statements which provide a comprehensive snapshot of entity finances for the 2022 23 Budget year, including the impact of Budget measures and resourcing on financial statements. 3.1 Budgeted financial statements 3.1.1 Explanatory notes and analysis of budgeted financial statements Budgeted Departmental Income Statement Total revenues for 2022 23 are budgeted at 403.5 million, an increase of 108.2 million from estimated actual revenue in 2021 22. This is mainly due to a 71.8 million increase in appropriation revenue from the Australian Government, mainly comprised of Satellite Based Augmentation System net increase of 65.2 million. Exploring for the Future phase two increase of 6.3 million. Strategic Basin Plans increase of 6.0 million. National Space Mission for Earth Observation not for publication. Critical Minerals Research and Development Hub increase of 0.9 million. Savings from External Labour, Advertising, Travel and Legal Expenses decrease of 11.6 million. The budgeted deficit for 2022 23 is 13.9 million. The deficit represents depreciation and amortisation on fixed assets of 10.2 million, which is not funded under the Government s net cash appropriation arrangements, and depreciation and amortisation on right of use assets of 27.4 million, less principal payments on leased assets of 23.7 million. Budgeted Departmental Balance Sheet Geoscience Australia s budgeted total assets of 577.5 million and total liabilities of 442.3 million in 2022 23 represent an increase of 87.2 million and 83.8 million respectively from 2021 22. This reflects an expected increase in appropriations receivable and supplier payables associated with recent measures. Budgeted Capital Budget Statement Planned capital expenditure for Geoscience Australia in 2022 23 is 17.3 million. This comprises capital expenditure funded from equity injections of 9.6 million and the departmental capital budget of 7.7 million.  Portfolio Budget Statements Geoscience Australia Page 145 Budgeted Administered Income Statement Geoscience Australia will make one payment on behalf of the Australian Government in 2022 23, being a grant of 0.02 million for the International Geoscience Program. Budgeted Administered Balance Sheet Geoscience Australia does not expect to hold any administered assets or liabilities in 2021 22 and 2022 23.   Portfolio Budget Statements Page 146 Geoscience Australia 3.2 Budgeted financial statements tables Table 3.1 Comprehensive income statement showing net cost of services for the period ended 30 June 2021 22 Estimated actual 000 2022 23 Budget 000 2023 24 Forward estimate 000 2024 25 Forward estimate 000 2025 26 Forward estimate 000 EXPENSES Employee benefits 82,831 81,378 84,692 85,090 84,793 Suppliers 120,908 295,044 258,596 214,843 203,614 Depreciation and amortisation a 37,430 37,604 37,684 38,161 38,159 Finance costs 3,764 3,317 3,008 2,685 2,347 Write down and impairment of assets 34 Other expenses 181 Total expenses 245,148 417,343 383,980 340,779 328,913 LESS OWN SOURCE INCOME Own source revenue Sale of goods and rendering of services 31,095 68,535 52,134 47,667 45,987 Sublease income 713 401 401 401 401 Other 3,442 2,631 2,633 2,635 2,628 Total own source revenue 35,250 71,567 55,168 50,703 49,016 Gains Other 1 Total gains 1 Total own source income 35,251 71,567 55,168 50,703 49,016 Net cost of contribution by services 209,897 345,776 328,812 290,076 279,897 Revenue from Government 260,052 331,897 315,971 277,915 268,934 Surplus deficit attributable to the Australian Government 50,155 13,879 12,841 12,161 10,963 OTHER COMREHENSIVE INCOME Changes in asset revaluation surplus 4,151 Total other comprehensive income 4,151 Total comprehensive income loss 54,306 13,879 12,841 12,161 10,963 Total comprehensive income loss attributable to the Australian Government 54,306 13,879 12,841 12,161 10,963  Portfolio Budget Statements Geoscience Australia Page 147 Table 3.1 Comprehensive income statement showing net cost of services for the period ended 30 June continued Note Impact of net cash appropriation arrangements 2021 22 Estimated actual 000 2022 23 Budget 000 2023 24 Forward estimate 000 2024 25 Forward estimate 000 2025 26 Forward estimate 000 Total comprehensive income loss as per statement of Comprehensive Income 54,306 13,879 12,841 12,161 10,963 plus depreciation amortisation expenses previously funded through revenue appropriations a 9,852 10,232 10,312 10,790 10,789 plus depreciation amortisation expenses for ROU assets b 27,578 27,372 27,372 27,371 27,370 less Lease principal repayments b 22,894 23,725 24,843 26,000 27,196 Net Cash Operating Surplus Deficit 68,842 Prepared on Australian Accounting Standards basis. a From 2010 11, the Government introduced net cash appropriation arrangements where Bill 1 revenue appropriations for the depreciation amortisation expenses of non corporate Commonwealth entities and select corporate Commonwealth entities were replaced with a separate capital budget the departmental capital budget, or DCB provided through Bill 1 equity appropriations. For information regarding DCBs, please refer to Table 3.5 Departmental Capital Budget Statement. b Applies leases under AASB 16 Leases.   Portfolio Budget Statements Page 148 Geoscience Australia Table 3.2 Budgeted departmental balance sheet as at 30 June 2021 22 Estimated actual 000 2022 23 Budget 000 2023 24 Forward estimate 000 2024 25 Forward estimate 000 2025 26 Forward estimate 000 ASSETS Financial assets Cash and cash equivalents 766 766 766 766 766 Trade and other receivables 126,821 231,686 182,912 137,238 140,525 Other financial assets 3,271 5,934 5,309 4,630 4,797 Total financial assets 130,858 238,386 188,987 142,634 146,088 Non financial assets Land and buildings 292,762 263,696 234,644 205,584 176,489 Property, plant and equipment 59,110 68,015 80,666 80,628 87,595 Intangibles 1,715 1,558 1,365 1,374 1,559 Other non financial assets 5,833 5,833 5,833 5,833 5,833 Total non financial assets 359,420 339,102 322,508 293,419 271,476 Total assets 490,278 577,488 511,495 436,053 417,564 LIABILITIES Payables Suppliers 11,644 119,382 68,695 20,739 22,588 Other payables 30,230 27,939 27,939 28,253 28,567 Total payables 41,874 147,321 96,634 48,992 51,155 Interest bearing liabilities Leases 285,497 261,772 236,929 210,929 183,733 Total interest bearing liabilities 285,497 261,772 236,929 210,929 183,733 Provisions Employee provisions 26,850 28,783 29,923 31,064 32,207 Other provisions 4,227 4,375 4,523 4,671 4,819 Total provisions 31,077 33,158 34,446 35,735 37,026 Total liabilities 358,448 442,251 368,009 295,656 271,914 Net assets 131,830 135,237 143,486 140,397 145,650 EQUITY Parent entity interest Contributed equity 65,693 82,979 104,069 113,141 129,357 Reserves 19,362 19,362 19,362 19,362 19,362 Retained surplus accumulated deficit 46,775 32,896 20,055 7,894 3,069 Total parent entity interest 131,830 135,237 143,486 140,397 145,650 Total equity 131,830 135,237 143,486 140,397 145,650 Prepared on Australian Accounting Standards basis. Equity is the residual interest in assets after deduction of liabilities.  Portfolio Budget Statements Geoscience Australia Page 149 Table 3.3 Departmental statement of changes in equity summary of movement Budget year 2022 23 Retained earnings 000 Asset revaluation reserve 000 Contributed equity capital 000 Total equity 000 Opening balance as at 1 July 2022 Balance carried forward from previous period 46,775 19,362 65,693 131,830 Adjusted opening balance 46,775 19,362 65,693 131,830 Comprehensive income Other comprehensive income Surplus deficit for the period 13,879 13,879 Total comprehensive income 13,879 13,879 Transactions with owners Contributions by owners Equity injection Appropriation 9,594 9,594 Departmental capital budget DCB 7,692 7,692 Sub total transactions with owners 17,286 17,286 Estimated closing balance as at 30 June 2023 32,896 19,362 82,979 135,237 Closing balance attributable to the Australian Government 32,896 19,362 82,979 135,237 Prepared on Australian Accounting Standards basis.   Portfolio Budget Statements Page 150 Geoscience Australia Table 3.4 Budgeted departmental statement of cash flows for the period ended 30 June 2021 22 Estimated actual 000 2022 23 Budget 000 2023 24 Forward estimate 000 2024 25 Forward estimate 000 2025 26 Forward estimate 000 OPERATING ACTIVITIES Cash received Appropriations 250,827 257,151 394,833 353,677 295,736 Receipts from Government 9 Sale of goods and rendering of services 27,528 63,793 53,160 48,747 46,221 Net GST received 13,485 11,281 9,399 7,782 8,604 Other 3,762 2,495 2,526 2,526 2,525 Total cash received 295,611 334,720 459,918 412,732 353,086 Cash used Employees 82,137 79,227 83,552 83,635 83,336 Suppliers 121,536 187,102 309,175 262,689 201,662 Borrowing costs Net GST paid 13,700 11,281 9,399 7,782 8,604 Interest payments on lease liability 3,713 3,267 2,958 2,635 2,297 s74 external revenue transferred to the OPA 45,684 30,118 30,089 30,089 30,089 Other 98 98 98 Total cash used 266,770 310,995 435,075 386,732 325,890 Net cash from used by operating activities 28,841 23,725 24,843 26,000 27,196 INVESTING ACTIVITIES Cash received Proceeds from sales of property, plant and equipment 21 Total cash received 21 Cash used Purchase of property, plant and equipment and intangibles 23,053 17,286 21,090 9,072 16,216 Total cash used 23,053 17,286 21,090 9,072 16,216 Net cash from used by investing activities 23,032 17,286 21,090 9,072 16,216 FINANCING ACTIVITIES Cash received Contributed equity 17,515 17,286 21,090 9,072 16,216 Total cash received 17,515 17,286 21,090 9,072 16,216 Cash used Principal payments on lease liability 22,894 23,725 24,843 26,000 27,196 Total cash used 22,894 23,725 24,843 26,000 27,196 Net cash from used by financing activities 5,379 6,439 3,753 16,928 10,980 Net increase decrease in cash held 430 Cash and cash equivalents at the beginning of the reporting period 336 766 766 766 766 Cash and cash equivalents at the end of the reporting period 766 766 766 766 766 Prepared on Australian Accounting Standards basis.  Portfolio Budget Statements Geoscience Australia Page 151 Table 3.5 Departmental capital budget statement for the period ended 30 June 2021 22 Estimated actual 000 2022 23 Budget 000 2023 24 Forward estimate 000 2024 25 Forward estimate 000 2025 26 Forward estimate 000 NEW CAPITAL APPROPRIATIONS Capital budget Bill 1 DCB 4,583 7,692 8,027 8,153 8,266 Equity injections Bill 2 7,127 9,594 13,063 919 7,950 Total new capital appropriations 11,710 17,286 21,090 9,072 16,216 Provided for Purchase of non financial assets 11,710 17,286 21,090 9,072 16,216 Total items 11,710 17,286 21,090 9,072 16,216 PURCHASE OF NON FINANCIAL ASSETS Funded by capital appropriations a 7,127 9,594 13,063 919 7,950 Funded by capital appropriation DCB b 4,583 7,692 8,027 8,153 8,266 TOTAL 11,710 17,286 21,090 9,072 16,216 Prepared on Australian Accounting Standards basis. a Includes both current Bill 2 and prior Act 2 4 6 appropriations. b Includes purchases from current and previous years departmental capital budgets DCBs .   Portfolio Budget Statements Page 152 Geoscience Australia Table 3.6 Statement of departmental asset movements Budget year 2022 23 Land 000 Buildings 000 Other property, plant and equipment 000 Heritage and cultural 000 Computer software and intangibles 000 Total 000 As at 1 July 2022 Gross book value 1,176 25,629 64,422 7,274 4,806 103,307 Gross book value ROU assets 842 352,095 162 353,099 Accumulated depreciation amortisation and impairment 4,488 12,625 3,091 20,204 Accumulated depreciation amortisation and impairment ROU assets 127 82,365 123 82,615 Opening net book balance 1,891 290,871 51,836 7,274 1,715 353,587 Capital asset additions Estimated expenditure on new or replacement assets By purchase appropriation equity a 500 16,586 200 17,286 Total additions 500 16,586 200 17,286 Other movements Depreciation amortisation expense 2,209 7,666 357 10,232 Depreciation amortisation expense on ROU assets 56 27,301 15 27,372 Total other movements 56 29,510 7,681 357 37,604 As at 30 June 2023 Gross book value 1,176 26,129 81,008 7,274 5,006 120,593 Gross book value ROU assets 842 352,095 162 353,099 Accumulated depreciation amortisation and impairment 6,697 20,291 3,448 30,436 Accumulated depreciation amortisation and impairment ROU assets 183 109,666 138 109,987 Closing net book balance 1,835 261,861 60,741 7,274 1,558 333,269 Prepared on Australian Accounting Standards basis. a Appropriation equity refers to equity injections appropriations provided through Appropriation Bill No. 2 2022 23 including Collection Development Acquisition Budget.  Portfolio Budget Statements Geoscience Australia Page 153 Table 3.7 Schedule of budgeted income and expenses administered on behalf of Government for the period ended 30 June 2021 22 Estimated actual 000 2022 23 Budget 000 2023 24 Forward estimate 000 2024 25 Forward estimate 000 2025 26 Forward estimate 000 EXPENSES Grants 19 19 19 19 Total expenses administered on behalf of Government 19 19 19 19 Net cost of contribution by services 19 19 19 19 Surplus deficit before income tax 19 19 19 19 Surplus deficit after income tax 19 19 19 19 Total comprehensive income loss 19 19 19 19 Prepared on Australian Accounting Standards basis. Table 3.8 Schedule of budgeted assets and liabilities administered on behalf of Government as at 30 June Geoscience Australia has no budgeted assets and liabilities administered on behalf of government therefore Table 3.8 is not presented. Table 3.9 Schedule of budgeted administered cash flows for the period ended 30 June 2021 22 Estimated actual 000 2022 23 Budget 000 2023 24 Forward estimate 000 2024 25 Forward estimate 000 2025 26 Forward estimate 000 OPERATING ACTIVITIES Cash used Grant 19 19 19 19 Total cash used 19 19 19 19 Net cash from used by operating activities 19 19 19 19 Net increase decrease in cash held 19 19 19 19 Cash and cash equivalents at end of reporting period Prepared on Australian Accounting Standards basis. Table 3.10 Schedule of administered capital budget statement for the period ended 30 June Geoscience Australia has no administered capital budget therefore Table 3.10 is not presented. Table 3.11 Statement of administered asset movements Budget year 2022 23 Geoscience Australia has no administered asset movements therefore Table 3.11 is not presented.   154   155 DEPARTMENT O IP Australia Entity resources and planned performance   156   157 IP Australia Section 1 Entity overview and resources 159 1.1 Strategic direction statement 159 1.2 Entity resource statement 161 1.3 Budget measures 162 Section 2 Outcomes and planned performance 163 2.1 Budgeted expenses and performance for Outcome 1 164 Section 3 Budgeted financial statements 169 3.1 Budgeted financial statements 169   158   IP Australia Page 159 IP Australia Section 1 Entity overview and resources 1.1 Strategic direction statement IP Australia is responsible for administering Australia s registrable intellectual property IP rights system, specifically patents, trade marks, designs and plant breeder s rights. IP Australia is a listed non corporate Commonwealth entity and recovers more than 98 of its costs by charging fees for its IP rights services in accordance with the Australian Government Charging Framework. Granting exclusive IP rights fosters increased innovation, investment and trade in Australia, and by Australians overseas, by Providing an effective legal framework for protection of innovative products and brands which creates a secure environment for investment. Providing incentives for undertaking research and development. Promoting the disclosure of discoveries and follow on generation of ideas. Enabling firms to build brand value and business reputation which in turn contributes to improved consumer confidence. IP Australia s Strategic Corporate Plan the plan guides the agency s strategic direction in pursuit of its vision to create a world leading IP system building prosperity for Australia. The plan provides an overview of IP Australia s purpose to ensure Australians benefit from great ideas, outlines the strategic objectives the agency wants to achieve and details the key activities intended to deliver those objectives. The plan can be found at IP Australia is committed to delivering and maintaining a world leading intellectual property system and services that are modern, effective, efficient and accessible. IP Australia promotes awareness of IP, regulates the IP attorney profession, provides advice to government on policy relating to the IP rights system, and contributes to bilateral and multilateral negotiations and the development of cooperation programs to support the global IP system. IP Australia s key focus areas for the budget and forward estimates include Supporting jobs, growth and accessibility by contributing to Australia s economic recovery objectives.   Portfolio Budget Statements Page 160 IP Australia Delivering and maintaining high quality and timely patents, trade marks, designs and plant breeder s rights. Increasing the digital capabilities and dexterity of our workforce to support continuous improvement in the delivery of world leading and contemporary digital IP services. Providing targeted education and awareness offerings that demonstrate the benefits of IP rights ownership and facilitate greater understanding of the IP system. Continuing the policy work on the Australian designs and plant breeder s rights systems to ensure they are fit for purpose and support the Australian economy now and in the future. Improving Australia s IP system to promote the cultural integrity and economic potential of Indigenous Knowledge. Continuing to support Australians to export and invest through the agency s international engagement activities. Enhancing data capability to ensure that IP Australia s information is used to deliver, shape and inform policy making and services across government as well as for core business and customers. Establishing a sustainable innovation model that explores, tests and develops innovative solutions to benefit IP Australia s customers.  Portfolio Budget Statements IP Australia Page 161 1.2 Entity resource statement Table 1.1 shows the total funding from all sources available to the entity for its operations and to deliver programs and services on behalf of the Government. The table summarises how resources will be applied by outcome government strategic policy objectives and by administered on behalf of the Government or the public and departmental for the entity s operations classification. For more detailed information on special accounts and special appropriations, please refer to the October Budget Paper No. 4 Agency Resourcing. Information in this table is presented on a resourcing that is, appropriations cash available basis, whilst the Budgeted expenses by Outcome 1 tables in Section 2 and the financial statements in Section 3 are presented on an accrual basis.   Portfolio Budget Statements Page 162 IP Australia Table 1.1 IP Australia resource statement Budget estimates for 2022 23 as at October Budget 2022 2021 22 Estimated actual 000 2022 23 Estimate 000 Departmental Annual appropriations ordinary annual services a Departmental appropriation 356 360 Total departmental annual appropriations 356 360 Special accounts b Opening balance 52,937 79,923 Appropriation receipts c 356 360 Non appropriation receipts 248,835 251,171 Total special accounts 302,128 331,454 less departmental appropriations drawn from annual special appropriations and credited to special accounts 356 360 Total departmental resourcing 302,128 331,454 Total resourcing for IP Australia 302,128 331,454 2021 22 2022 23 Average staffing level number 1,053 1,100 All figures shown above are GST exclusive these may not match figures in the cash flow statement. Prepared on a resourcing that is, appropriations available basis. a Appropriation Bill No. 1 2022 23 and Supply Act No. 1 2022 23. b Excludes trust moneys held in Services for Other Entities and Trust Moneys SOETM and other special accounts. For further information on special accounts, please refer to October Budget Paper No. 4 Agency Resourcing. Please also see Table 2.1 for further information on outcome and program expenses broken down by various funding sources, e.g. annual appropriations, special appropriations and special accounts. c Amounts credited to the special account from IP Australia s annual appropriations. 1.3 Budget measures There are no Budget measures relating to IP Australia detailed in October Budget Paper No. 2 Budget Measures therefore Table 1.2 is not presented.  Portfolio Budget Statements IP Australia Page 163 Section 2 Outcomes and planned performance Government outcomes are the intended results, impacts or consequences of actions by the Government on the Australian community. Commonwealth programs are the primary vehicle by which government entities achieve the intended results of their outcome statements. Entities are required to identify the programs which contribute to government outcomes over the Budget and forward years. Each outcome is described below together with its related programs. The following provides detailed information on expenses for each outcome and program, further broken down by funding source. Note Performance reporting requirements in the Portfolio Budget Statements are part of the Commonwealth performance framework established by the Public Governance, Performance and Accountability Act 2013. It is anticipated that the performance criteria described in Portfolio Budget Statements will be read with broader information provided in an entity s corporate plans and annual performance statements included in annual reports to provide a complete picture of an entity s planned and actual performance. The most recent corporate plan for IP Australia can be found at The most recent annual performance statement can be found at   Portfolio Budget Statements Page 164 IP Australia 2.1 Budgeted expenses and performance for Outcome 1 Outcome 1 Increased innovation, investment and trade in Australia, and by Australians overseas, through the administration of the registrable intellectual property rights system, promoting public awareness and industry engagement, and advising government Linked programs Department of Industry, Science and Resources Programs Program 1.1 Investing in science, technology and commercialisation Program 1.2 Growing innovative and competitive businesses, industries and regions Contribution to Outcome 1 made by linked programs The Department of Industry, Science and Resources contributes to Outcome 1 through its policies and programs supporting science and commercialisation, and through the operation of the Office of the Chief Scientist and the Office of Innovation and Science Australia.  Portfolio Budget Statements IP Australia Page 165 Budgeted expenses for Outcome 1 This table shows how much the entity intends to spend on an accrual basis on achieving the outcome, broken down by program, as well as by departmental funding sources. Table 2.1.1 Budgeted expenses for Outcome 1 Outcome 1 Increased innovation, investment and trade in Australia, and by Australians overseas, through the administration of the registrable intellectual property rights system, promoting public awareness and industry engagement, and advising government 2021 22 Estimated actual 000 2022 23 Budget 000 2023 24 Forward estimate 000 2024 25 Forward estimate 000 2025 26 Forward estimate 000 Program 1 IP Rights Administration and Professional Registration Departmental expenses Special accounts 207,162 225,185 230,716 236,794 244,422 Expenses not requiring appropriation in the Budget year a 155 160 165 170 175 Departmental total 207,317 225,345 230,881 236,964 244,597 Total expenses for program 1 207,317 225,345 230,881 236,964 244,597 Program 2 Education and Awareness Departmental expenses Special accounts 2,498 2,715 2,782 2,855 2,947 Departmental total 2,498 2,715 2,782 2,855 2,947 Total expenses for program 2 2,498 2,715 2,782 2,855 2,947 Program 3 Advice to Government and International Engagement Departmental expenses Departmental appropriation 356 360 370 373 376 Special accounts 16,901 18,398 18,849 19,352 19,985 Departmental total 17,257 18,758 19,219 19,725 20,361 Total expenses for program 3 17,257 18,758 19,219 19,725 20,361 Outcome 1 Totals by appropriation type Departmental expenses Departmental appropriation 356 360 370 373 376 Special accounts 226,561 246,298 252,347 259,001 267,354 Expenses not requiring appropriation in the Budget year a 155 160 165 170 175 Departmental total 227,072 246,818 252,882 259,544 267,905 Total expenses for Outcome 1 227,072 246,818 252,882 259,544 267,905 2021 22 2022 23 Average staffing level number 1,053 1,100 a Expenses not requiring appropriation in the Budget year are made up of audit fees. Note Departmental appropriation splits and totals are indicative estimates and may change in the course of the Budget year as government priorities change.   Portfolio Budget Statements Page 166 IP Australia Table 2.1.2 Performance measure for Outcome 1 Table 2.1.2 details the performance measures for each program associated with Outcome 1. It also provides the related key activities as expressed in the current corporate plan where further detail is provided about the delivery of the activities related to the program, the context in which these activities are delivered and how the performance of these activities will be measured. Where relevant, details of 2022 23 October Budget measures that have created new programs or materially changed existing programs are provided. Outcome 1 Increased innovation, investment and trade in Australia, and by Australians overseas, through the administration of the registrable intellectual property rights system, promoting public awareness and industry engagement, and advising government Program 1 IP Rights Administration and Professional Registration IP Australia will deliver robust intellectual property IP rights that satisfy IP Australia s customers in terms of timeliness and quality, and administer the professional registration system for persons practising as Patent and or Trade Marks Attorneys. Key Activities Administer patents, trade marks, designs and plant breeder s rights legislation. Administer the trans Tasman IP attorney regime for Australian and New Zealand patents attorneys, and Australian trade marks attorneys. Year Performance measures Expected Performance Results Prior Year 2021 22 Customer Service Charter and legislative commitments are met. Not met IP Australia met 6 of the 9 key targets under the Customer Service Charter. Process trans Tasman attorney registration applications within 15 working days from the date that the application complies with registration requirements. Met 100 of our applications were processed within the required timeframe. Year Performance measures Planned Performance Results Budget Year 2022 23 IP Australia s timeliness, quality, satisfaction, and availability commitments are met. Meet the key organisational performance metrics for timeliness, quality, satisfaction and availability published in IP Australia s 2022 23 Corporate Plan. Process trans Tasman attorney registration applications within 15 working days from the date that the application complies with registration requirements. 100 of applications are processed within the required timeframe. Forward Estimates 2023 26 As per 2022 23. As per 2022 23. Material changes to Program 1 resulting from 2022 23 October Budget Measures Nil  Portfolio Budget Statements IP Australia Page 167 Program 2 Education and Awareness IP Australia will facilitate understanding among its stakeholders of the value of IP, and access to the domestic and international intellectual property system in line with Australia s interests. Key Activities Deliver proactive outreach programs that inform and educate Australian businesses, with emphasis on small and medium enterprises. Build and leverage partnerships with government, industry partners and universities to promote the IP system and maximise impact. Year Performance measures Expected Performance Results Prior Year 2021 22 Improved awareness of the IP rights system measured by 1. Effective delivery of public education and awareness programs, which promote the importance of IP and provide Australians with the tools they require to make informed decisions and 2. Increase the level of customers knowledge of Australia s IP system on the 2020 21 baseline 60 . Partially met IP Australia successfully delivered public education and awareness programs and established relationships with universities, Government departments and peak bodies, updated our education resources, and developed a Train the Trainer style education package designed to help provide Australians with the tools required to make informed decisions about their IP. The reported level of customers knowledge of Australia s IP system was 55 . There was a 5 decrease in adequate knowledge , while extensive knowledge and no knowledge remain consistent. Little knowledge increased by 5 . Year Performance measures Planned Performance Results Budget Year 2022 23 Improved awareness of the IP rights system measured by 1. Effective delivery of public education and awareness programs, which promote the importance of IP and provide Australians with the tools they require to make informed decisions and 2. An increase in the level of customer s knowledge of Australia s IP system from the 2021 22 result. 1. Meet the key performance metrics for public education and awareness programs published in IP Australia s Strategic Corporate Plan 2022 23. 2. An increase to the percentage of customers who respond that their level of knowledge of the IP system is either adequate or extensive from the 2021 22 result. Forward Estimates 2023 26 As per 2022 23. As per 2022 23. Material changes to Program 2 resulting from 2022 23 October Budget Measures Nil   Portfolio Budget Statements Page 168 IP Australia Program 3 Advice to Government and International Engagement Supporting policy and legislative change to foster Australian innovation by shaping the development of the IP system both domestically and abroad. IP Australia engages internationally to influence the development of effective intellectual property systems in line with Australia s interests. Key Activities Provide high quality advice to the Government on the development of IP policy and legislation. Engage internationally, working with bodies such as the World Intellectual Property Organization and other IP offices to influence IP policy and practice. Year Performance measures Expected Performance Results Prior Year 2021 22 Provision of high quality advice to the Australian Government on policy, legislation, ministerial correspondence and briefs. Met 1.9 of the items delivered to the Minister s Office were requested to be redrafted. 100 of ministerial briefs and correspondence requested by the Minister s Office were delivered within the agreed timeframes. Year Performance measures Planned Performance Results Budget Year 2022 23 Provision of high quality advice to the Australian Government on policy, legislation, ministerial correspondence and briefs. 1. Ministerial briefs and correspondence delivered to the Minister s Office are of a high quality with less than 10 requested to be redrafted. 2. 100 of ministerial briefs and correspondence requested by the Minister s Office are delivered within the agreed timeframes. Forward Estimates 2023 26 As per 2022 23. As per 2022 23. Material changes to Program 3 resulting from 2022 23 October Budget Measures Nil  Portfolio Budget Statements IP Australia Page 169 Section 3 Budgeted financial statements Section 3 presents budgeted financial statements which provide a comprehensive snapshot of entity finances for the 2022 23 Budget year, including the impact of Budget measures and resourcing on financial statements. 3.1 Budgeted financial statements 3.1.1 Differences between entity resourcing and financial statements IP Australia is budgeting for an operating surplus of 5.0 million for 2022 23. 3.1.2 Explanatory notes and analysis of budgeted financial statements Budgeted Departmental Income Statement Departmental revenue from contracts with customers in 2022 23 is estimated to be 247.6 million. The increase from the 2021 22 estimated actual of 247.1 million reflects forecasted growth in demand for IP Rights. Rental income of 3.7 million is budgeted for 2022 23 and reflects income received from sub leasing arrangements at Discovery House. Revenue from Government for 2022 23 is budgeted at 0.4 million and reflects an appropriation for non regulatory charging activities undertaken by IP Australia. Total departmental expenses budgeted in 2022 23 are 246.8 million, comprising 145.2 million for employee benefits, 67.1 million for suppliers, 32.9 million for depreciation and amortisation and 1.6 million in finance costs. Budgeted Departmental Balance Sheet The statement shows the estimated end of year position for departmental assets and liabilities. Assets Total departmental assets budgeted for in 2022 23 are 359.6 million, comprising 79.4 million in financial assets and 280.1 million in non financial assets. Financial assets consist of 74.4 million for cash and 5.0 million for receivables. Non financial assets include 138.9 million for land and buildings, 124.1 million for intangibles, 5.9 million for property, plant and equipment and 11.2 million in other assets.   Portfolio Budget Statements Page 170 IP Australia Liabilities Total departmental liabilities budgeted for in 2022 23 are 248.9 million, comprising 76.3 million in payables, 120.6 million in interest bearing liabilities leases and 52.0 million in provisions. The other payables estimate represents the unearned income attributable to unexamined IP Rights. Budgeted Departmental Statement of Cash Flows The movements in the cash flows are consistent with movements in the income statement and the balance sheet.  Portfolio Budget Statements IP Australia Page 171 3.2 Budgeted financial statements tables Table 3.1 Comprehensive income statement showing net cost of services for the period ended 30 June 2021 22 Estimated actual 000 2022 23 Budget 000 2023 24 Forward estimate 000 2024 25 Forward estimate 000 2025 26 Forward estimate 000 EXPENSES Employee benefits 133,262 145,207 149,956 155,246 160,650 Suppliers 58,186 67,078 66,627 68,619 68,944 Depreciation and amortisation 32,748 32,942 34,845 34,364 37,142 Finance costs 1,721 1,591 1,454 1,315 1,169 Write down and impairment of assets 1,155 Total expenses 227,072 246,818 252,882 259,544 267,905 LESS OWN SOURCE INCOME Own source revenue Revenue from contracts with customers 247,091 247,604 253,153 259,807 265,160 Rental income 659 3,694 3,694 3,694 3,694 Other 166 160 165 170 175 Total own source revenue 247,916 251,458 257,012 263,671 269,029 Gains Sale of assets 3 Total gains 3 Total own source income 247,919 251,458 257,012 263,671 269,029 Net cost of contribution by services 20,847 4,640 4,130 4,127 1,124 Revenue from Government 356 360 370 373 376 Surplus deficit attributable to the Australian Government 21,203 5,000 4,500 4,500 1,500 Total comprehensive income loss 21,203 5,000 4,500 4,500 1,500 Total comprehensive income loss attributable to the Australian Government 21,203 5,000 4,500 4,500 1,500 Prepared on Australian Accounting Standards basis.   Portfolio Budget Statements Page 172 IP Australia Table 3.2 Budgeted departmental balance sheet as at 30 June 2021 22 Estimated actual 000 2022 23 Budget 000 2023 24 Forward estimate 000 2024 25 Forward estimate 000 2025 26 Forward estimate 000 ASSETS Financial assets Cash and cash equivalents 79,923 74,371 75,418 76,626 76,964 Trade and other receivables 3,926 5,042 5,382 5,698 5,841 Total financial assets 83,849 79,413 80,800 82,324 82,805 Non financial assets Land and buildings 154,153 138,922 123,541 108,435 92,921 Property, plant and equipment 2,316 5,881 6,115 6,370 6,369 Intangibles 115,365 124,090 134,392 144,879 153,252 Other non financial assets 9,752 11,243 11,167 11,501 11,556 Total non financial assets 281,586 280,136 275,215 271,185 264,098 Total assets 365,435 359,549 356,015 353,509 346,903 LIABILITIES Payables Suppliers 13,167 9,048 8,984 9,253 9,297 Other payables 70,296 67,299 67,249 67,399 67,549 Total payables 83,463 76,347 76,233 76,652 76,846 Interest bearing liabilities Leases 131,173 120,574 109,634 98,428 86,122 Total interest bearing liabilities 131,173 120,574 109,634 98,428 86,122 Provisions Employee provisions 45,199 52,028 55,045 58,826 62,832 Total provisions 45,199 52,028 55,045 58,826 62,832 Total liabilities 259,835 248,949 240,912 233,906 225,800 Net assets 105,600 110,600 115,103 119,603 121,103 EQUITY Parent entity interest Contributed equity 5,908 5,908 5,908 5,908 5,908 Reserves 2,950 2,950 2,950 2,950 2,950 Retained surplus accumulated deficit 96,742 101,742 106,245 110,745 112,245 Total parent entity interest 105,600 110,600 115,103 119,603 121,103 Total equity 105,600 110,600 115,103 119,603 121,103 Prepared on Australian Accounting Standards basis. Equity is the residual interest in assets after deduction of liabilities.  Portfolio Budget Statements IP Australia Page 173 Table 3.3 Departmental statement of changes in equity summary of movement Budget year 2022 23 Retained earnings 000 Asset revaluation reserve 000 Contributed equity capital 000 Total equity 000 Opening balance as at 1 July 2022 Balance carried forward from previous period 96,742 2,950 5,908 105,600 Adjusted opening balance 96,742 2,950 5,908 105,600 Comprehensive income Surplus deficit for the period 5,000 5,000 Total comprehensive income 5,000 5,000 of which Attributable to the Australian Government 5,000 5,000 Estimated closing balance as at 30 June 2023 101,742 2,950 5,908 110,600 Closing balance attributable to the Australian Government 101,742 2,950 5,908 110,600 Prepared on Australian Accounting Standards basis.   Portfolio Budget Statements Page 174 IP Australia Table 3.4 Budgeted departmental statement of cash flows for the period ended 30 June 2021 22 Estimated actual 000 2022 23 Budget 000 2023 24 Forward estimate 000 2024 25 Forward estimate 000 2025 26 Forward estimate 000 OPERATING ACTIVITIES Cash received Appropriations 356 360 370 373 376 Sale of goods and rendering of services 248,831 251,267 256,442 263,399 268,872 Net GST received 617 795 15 64 11 Total cash received 248,570 250,832 256,827 263,708 269,237 Cash used Employees 134,553 142,013 146,939 151,465 156,644 Suppliers 52,555 72,182 66,447 68,514 68,780 Interest payments on lease liability 1,721 1,591 1,454 1,315 1,169 Total cash used 188,829 215,786 214,840 221,294 226,593 Net cash from used by operating activities 59,741 35,046 41,987 42,414 42,644 INVESTING ACTIVITIES Cash received Proceeds from sales of property, plant and equipment 4 Total cash received 4 Purchase of property, plant and equipment and intangibles 22,379 30,000 30,000 30,000 30,000 Total cash used 22,379 30,000 30,000 30,000 30,000 Net cash from used by investing activities 22,375 30,000 30,000 30,000 30,000 FINANCING ACTIVITIES Cash used Principal payments on lease liability 10,380 10,598 10,940 11,206 12,306 Total cash used 10,380 10,598 10,940 11,206 12,306 Net cash from used by financing activities 10,380 10,598 10,940 11,206 12,306 Net increase decrease in cash held 26,986 5,552 1,047 1,208 338 Cash and cash equivalents at the beginning of the reporting period 52,937 79,923 74,371 75,418 76,626 Cash and cash equivalents at the end of the reporting period 79,923 74,371 75,418 76,626 76,964 Prepared on Australian Accounting Standards basis.  Portfolio Budget Statements IP Australia Page 175 Table 3.5 Departmental capital budget statement for the period ended 30 June 2021 22 Estimated actual 000 2022 23 Budget 000 2023 24 Forward estimate 000 2024 25 Forward estimate 000 2025 26 Forward estimate 000 PURCHASE OF NON FINANCIAL ASSETS Funded internally from departmental resources a 22,379 30,000 30,000 30,000 30,000 TOTAL 22,379 30,000 30,000 30,000 30,000 RECONCILIATION OF CASH USED TO ACQUIRE ASSETS TO ASSET MOVEMENT TABLE Total purchases 22,379 30,000 30,000 30,000 30,000 Total cash used to acquire assets 22,379 30,000 30,000 30,000 30,000 Prepared on Australian Accounting Standards basis. a Includes the source of funding for own source revenue receipts.   Portfolio Budget Statements Page 176 IP Australia Table 3.6 Statement of departmental asset movements Budget year 2022 23 Buildings 000 Other property, plant and equipment 000 Computer software and intangibles 000 Total 000 As at 1 July 2022 Gross book value 34,610 9,327 221,719 265,656 Gross book value ROU assets 159,898 329 160,227 Accumulated depreciation amortisation and impairment 3,313 7,012 106,352 116,677 Accumulated depreciation amortisation and impairment ROU assets 37,042 329 37,371 Opening net book balance 154,153 2,315 115,367 271,835 Capital asset additions Estimated expenditure on new or replacement assets By purchase other 300 5,444 24,256 30,000 Total additions 300 5,444 24,256 30,000 Other movements Depreciation amortisation expense 3,176 1,878 15,533 20,587 Depreciation amortisation on ROU assets 12,355 12,355 Total other movements 15,531 1,878 15,533 32,942 As at 30 June 2023 Gross book value 34,910 14,771 245,975 295,656 Gross book value ROU assets 159,898 329 160,227 Accumulated depreciation amortisation and impairment 6,489 8,890 121,885 137,264 Accumulated depreciation amortisation and impairment ROU assets 49,397 329 49,726 Closing net book balance 138,922 5,881 124,090 268,893 Prepared on Australian Accounting Standards basis.  Portfolio Budget Statements IP Australia Page 177 Table 3.7 Schedule of budgeted income and expenses administered on behalf of Government for the period ended 30 June IP Australia has no budgeted income and expenses administered on behalf of Government therefore Table 3.7 is not presented. Table 3.8 Schedule of budgeted assets and liabilities administered on behalf of Government as at 30 June IP Australia has no budgeted assets and liabilities administered on behalf of Government therefore Table 3.8 is not presented. Table 3.9 Schedule of budgeted administered cash flows for the period ended 30 June IP Australia has no budgeted administered cash flows therefore Table 3.9 is not presented. Table 3.10 Schedule of administered capital budget statement for the period ended 30 June IP Australia has no administered capital budget therefore Table 3.10 is not presented. Table 3.11 Statement of administered asset movements Budget year 2022 23 IP Australia has no administered asset movements therefore Table 3.11 is not presented.   178   179 DEPARTMENT O National Offshore Petroleum Safety and Environmental Management Authority Entity resources and planned performance   180   181 National Offshore Petroleum Safety and Environmental Management Authority Section 1 Entity overview and resources 183 1.1 Strategic direction statement 183 1.2 Entity resource statement 185 1.3 Budget measures 186 Section 2 Outcomes and planned performance 187 2.1 Budgeted expenses and performance for Outcome 1 188 Section 3 Budgeted financial statements 192 3.1 Budgeted financial statements 192   182   National Offshore Petroleum Safety and Environmental Management Authority Page 183 National Offshore Petroleum Safety and Environmental Management Authority Section 1 Entity overview and resources 1.1 Strategic direction statement The National Offshore Petroleum Safety and Environmental Management Authority NOPSEMA was established as an independent statutory authority under the Offshore Petroleum and Greenhouse Gas Storage Act 2006 OPGGS Act and as a corporate Commonwealth entity under the Public Governance, Performance and Accountability Act 2013 PGPA Act . It operates on a cost recovery basis through levies and fees. NOPSEMA regulates the occupational health and safety OHS structural and well integrity and environmental management for all offshore petroleum and greenhouse gas storage activities in Commonwealth waters. Commonwealth waters comprises of those areas beyond three nautical miles from the territorial sea baseline.1 NOPSEMA also regulates petroleum and greenhouse gas storage activities in coastal waters where a state or the Northern Territory has conferred regulatory powers and functions.2 NOPSEMA s legislated functions are detailed in section 646 of the OPGGS Act. NOPSEMA fulfils its legislated functions through delivery of regulatory activities promotion and advice, assessment, compliance monitoring, investigation, and compliance and enforcement action. NOPSEMA will continue to focus on fulfilling its legislated functions to bring about improvements in industry performance and to secure compliance. In 2022 23, NOPSEMA s key priorities will include providing expert, consistent, and independent regulatory decisions in accordance with legislation communicating information and regulatory perspectives to stakeholders to drive forward improvements in industry performance while maintaining safety and environmental safeguards 1 The territorial sea baseline varies depending upon the shape of the coastline in any given locality. See for a comprehensive description and maps. 2 Currently, only Victoria has conferred powers and functions to NOPSEMA for the regulation of OHS and structural and well integrity for petroleum and greenhouse gas activities.   Portfolio Budget Statements Page 184 National Offshore Petroleum Safety and Environmental Management Authority providing operational and regulatory advice to government on legislative development and reform initiatives further developing effective working relationships with stakeholders to aid understanding of relevant regulatory requirements progressing transparency and stakeholder engagement initiatives with a view to enhancing the community s level of trust in NOPSEMA as a robust, fair, and transparent regulator providing a basis for conferral of powers and functions for coastal waters from states territories and further regulatory streamlining opportunities within Commonwealth waters working with industry and other stakeholders to reduce the regulatory burden and unnecessary compliance costs collaborating with international regulatory counterparts on joint program initiatives and information sharing. Under the Offshore Electricity Infrastructure Act 2021, NOPSEMA has also been given the role and functions of the Offshore Infrastructure Regulator the Regulator . As the Regulator, NOPSEMA regulates the occupational health and safety, environmental management, infrastructure integrity and financial security of offshore infrastructure activities in offshore Commonwealth areas. NOPSEMA s Corporate Plan 2022 27 provides further details on the direction for the organisation. The corporate plan is prepared in accordance with the OPGGS Act for the purposes of, and in compliance with, the PGPA Act. The corporate plan, and further information about NOPSEMA, can be accessed at  Portfolio Budget Statements National Offshore Petroleum Safety and Environmental Management Authority Page 185 1.2 Entity resource statement Table 1.1 shows the total funding from all sources available to the entity for its operations and to deliver programs and services on behalf of the Government. The table summarises how resources will be applied by outcome government strategic policy objectives and by administered on behalf of the Government or the public and departmental for the entity s operations classification. For more detailed information on special accounts and special appropriations, please refer to Budget Paper No. 4 Agency Resourcing. Information in this table is presented on a resourcing that is, appropriations cash available basis, whilst the Budgeted expenses by Outcome 1 tables in Section 2 and the financial statements in Section 3 are presented on an accrual basis. Table 1.1 NOPSEMA resource statement Budget estimates for 2022 23 as at October Budget 2022 2021 22 Estimated actual 000 2022 23 Estimate 000 Opening balance cash reserves at 1 July 20,461 17,348 Funds from Government Annual appropriations ordinary annual services a Outcome 1 1,500 9,112 Total annual appropriations 1,500 9,112 Amounts received from related entities Amounts from portfolio department b 40,419 41,370 Total amounts received from related entities 40,419 41,370 Total funds from Government 41,919 50,482 Funds from other sources Interest 56 187 Other 2,210 1,259 Total funds from other sources 2,266 1,446 Total net resourcing for NOPSEMA 64,646 69,276 2021 22 2022 23 Average staffing level number 132 135 All figures shown above are GST exclusive these may not match figures in the cash flow statement. a Appropriation Bill No. 1 2022 23 and Supply Act No. 1 2022 23. b NOPSEMA became a corporate Commonwealth entity on 1 July 2014 and receives its funding through a special appropriation which is administered through the Department of Industry, Science and Resources. This funding is equal in value to the levies NOPSEMA collects from the oil and gas industries.   Portfolio Budget Statements Page 186 National Offshore Petroleum Safety and Environmental Management Authority 1.3 Budget measures Budget measures in Part 1 relating to NOPSEMA are detailed in October Budget Paper No. 2 Budget Measures and are summarised below. Table 1.2 NOPSEMA 2022 23 October Budget measures Part 1 Measures announced since the 2022 23 March Budget Program 2021 22 000 2022 23 000 2023 24 000 2024 25 000 2025 26 000 Payment Measures An Ambitious and Enduring APS Reform Plan a 1 Departmental payment 1 45 Total 1 45 Savings from External Labour, and Savings from Advertising, Travel and Legal Expenses b 1 Departmental payment 17 Total 17 Total payment measures Departmental 18 45 Total 18 45 Prepared on a Government Financial Statistics Underlying Cash basis. Figures displayed as a negative represent a decrease in funds and a positive represent an increase in funds. a The lead entity for measure An Ambitious and Enduring APS Reform Plan is the Department of the Prime Minister and Cabinet. The full measure description and package details appear in October Budget Paper No. 2 Budget Measures under the Prime Minister and Cabinet Portfolio. b The measure Savings from External Labour, and Savings from Advertising, Travel and Legal Expenses is part of a Cross Portfolio measure. The full measure description and package details appear in October Budget Paper No. 2 Budget Measures under Cross Portfolio.  Portfolio Budget Statements National Offshore Petroleum Safety and Environmental Management Authority Page 187 Section 2 Outcomes and planned performance Government outcomes are the intended results, impacts or consequences of actions by the Government on the Australian community. Commonwealth programs are the primary vehicle by which government entities achieve the intended results of their outcome statements. Entities are required to identify the programs which contribute to government outcomes over the Budget and forward years. Each outcome is described below together with its related programs. The following provides detailed information on expenses for each outcome and program, further broken down by funding source. Note Performance reporting requirements in the Portfolio Budget Statements are part of the Commonwealth performance framework established by the Public Governance, Performance and Accountability Act 2013. It is anticipated that the performance criteria described in Portfolio Budget Statements will be read with broader information provided in an entity s corporate plans and annual performance statements included in annual reports to provide a complete picture of an entity s planned and actual performance. The most recent corporate plan for NOPSEMA can be found at The most recent annual performance statement can be found at and environmental management authority reporting year 2020 21   Portfolio Budget Statements Page 188 National Offshore Petroleum Safety and Environmental Management Authority 2.1 Budgeted expenses and performance for Outcome 1 Outcome 1 Promote and enforce the effective management of risks to the workforce, the environment and the structural integrity of facilities, wells and the well related equipment of the Australian offshore petroleum and greenhouse gas storage industries through regulatory oversight Linked programs Department of Industry, Science and Resources Programs Program 1.2 Growing innovative and competitive businesses, industries and regions Program 1.3 Supporting a strong resources sector Contribution to Outcome 1 made by linked programs The Department of Industry, Science and Resources contributes to Outcome 1 through its policies and program relating to the management and administration of the Offshore Petroleum and Greenhouse Gas Storage Act 2006 and associated regulations. Department of Climate Change, Energy, the Environment and Water Programs Program 2.2 Environmental Information and Research Program 3.1 Antarctica Science Policy and Presence Contribution to Outcome 1 made by linked programs The National Environmental Science Program contributes knowledge and understanding of Australia s marine environment to support environmental impact assessment and industry s management of its impacts. Scientific capacity within the Australian Antarctic Division can be accessed to support regulatory functions.  Portfolio Budget Statements National Offshore Petroleum Safety and Environmental Management Authority Page 189 Budgeted expenses for Outcome 1 This table shows how much NOPSEMA intends to spend on an accrual basis on achieving the outcome, broken down by program, as well as by departmental funding sources. Table 2.1.1 Budgeted expenses for Outcome 1 Outcome 1 Promote and enforce the effective management of risks to the workforce, the environment and the structural integrity of facilities, wells and well related equipment of the Australian offshore petroleum and greenhouse gas storage industries through regulatory oversight 2021 22 Estimated actual 000 2022 23 Budget 000 2023 24 Forward estimate 000 2024 25 Forward estimate 000 2025 26 Forward estimate 000 Program 1 Regulatory oversight of Safety Cases, Wells Operations Management Plans and Environment Plans coupled with effective monitoring, investigation and enforcement Revenue from Government Ordinary annual services Appropriation Bill No.1 1,500 9,112 8,169 6,007 Payment from related entities 40,419 41,370 39,774 38,957 39,327 Expenses not requiring appropriation in the budget year a 5,395 2,504 1,928 4,204 4,576 Revenues from other independent sources 2,266 1,329 895 695 695 Total expenses for Program 1 38,790 49,307 50,766 49,863 44,598 Outcome 1 totals by resource type Revenue from Government Ordinary annual services Appropriation Bill No. 1 1,500 9,112 8,169 6,007 Payment from related entities 40,419 41,370 39,774 38,957 39,327 Expenses not requiring appropriation in the budget year a 5,395 2,504 1,928 4,204 4,576 Revenues from other independent sources 2,266 1,329 895 695 695 Total expenses for Outcome 1 38,790 49,307 50,766 49,863 44,598 2021 22 2022 23 Average staffing level number 132 135 a Expenses not requiring appropriation in the Budget year consist of an approved operating loss. Note Departmental appropriation splits and totals are indicative estimates and may change in the course of the budget year as government priorities change.   Portfolio Budget Statements Page 190 National Offshore Petroleum Safety and Environmental Management Authority Table 2.1.2 Performance measure for Outcome 1 Table 2.1.2 details the performance measures for each program associated with Outcome 1. It also provides the related key activities as expressed in the current corporate plan where further detail is provided about the delivery of the activities related to the program, the context in which these activities are delivered and how the performance of these activities will be measured. Where relevant, details of 2022 23 October Budget measures that have created new programs or materially changed existing programs are provided. Outcome 1 Promote and enforce the effective management of risks to the workforce, the environment and the structural integrity of facilities, wells and well related equipment of the Australian offshore petroleum and greenhouse gas storage industries through regulatory oversight Program 1 Regulatory oversight of Safety Cases, Well Operations Management Plans and Environment Plans coupled with effective monitoring, investigation and enforcement. This program contributes to the outcome by fulfilling NOPSEMA s legislated functions, including assessment, inspection, enforcement, promotion and advisory activities, with its target group being duty holders in the offshore petroleum industry. Key Activities NOPSEMA delivers Program 1 by Exercising legislative powers in line with government policy and making merit based decisions on the material evidence and facts with which we are presented. Maintaining an effective risk based compliance monitoring and enforcement framework, allowing for proportionate responses to risks suited to their size, nature and complexity. Proactively employing appropriate regulatory tools to ensure duty holder compliance and risk mitigation in relation to offshore energy activities. Maintaining a sound information management system that records regulatory decisions, including the rationale and supporting evidence for a decision. Undertaking functions in line with legislative requirements, government policies and relevant guidance relating to greenhouse gas emissions and climate change. Year Performance measures Expected Performance Results Prior Year 2021 22 Assessments are undertaken in line with risk based elements as per NOPSEMA policies 100 Risk based inspections are conducted to meet policy targets 100 Enforcement actions are undertaken in accordance with the Enforcement Management Model 100 Incidents are investigated in accordance with NOPSEMA policies 100 Year Performance measures Planned Performance Results Budget Year 2022 23 a Independently administer the regulator framework in line with government policy and guidance and make merit based decisions on the evidence and facts presented. 100  Portfolio Budget Statements National Offshore Petroleum Safety and Environmental Management Authority Page 191 Budget Year 2022 23 a Apply a risk based graduated enforcement regime aimed at changing industry behaviours for longer term performance improvements. 100 Implement the compliance strategy using a range of appropriate tools to ensure offshore energy activities are undertaken in a safe and environmentally responsible manner by encouraging, monitoring and enforcing compliance with the law. 100 Capture and securely store regulator decisions and the rationale and supporting evidence for those decisions in our digital information systems. 100 Regulatory decisions are made in accordance with legislative requirements, government policies and relevant guidance relating to GHG emissions and climate change. 100 Forward Estimates 2023 26 As per 2022 23. As per 2022 23. Material changes to Program 1.1 resulting from 2022 23 October Budget Measures Nil a Refers to updated performance measures that are reflected in the 2022 27 Corporate Plan.   Portfolio Budget Statements Page 192 National Offshore Petroleum Safety and Environmental Management Authority Section 3 Budgeted financial statements Section 3 presents budgeted financial statements which provide a comprehensive snapshot of entity finances for the 2022 23 Budget year, including the impact of Budget measures and resourcing on financial statements. 3.1 Budgeted financial statements 3.1.1 Differences between entity resourcing and financial statements There are no material differences between the entity resources table and the financial statements. 3.1.2 Explanatory notes and analysis of budgeted financial statements NOPSEMA cost recovers under the OPGGS Act and associated legislation. NOPSEMA s levies and fees are set and managed in accordance with the Australian Government Charging Framework. This framework builds upon the existing Australian Government Cost Recovery Guidelines, which require the preparation and review of a Cost Recovery Implementation Statement CRIS . Levies and fees are collected from duty holders planning for, and undertaking, offshore petroleum and greenhouse gas storage operations. These levies and fees allow NOPSEMA to recover its expenditure related to effectively discharging its regulatory responsibilities effectively and achieving the outcomes stated in Section 2.1. The NOPSEMA CRIS is maintained to reflect changes to the cost recovery model and is updated regularly with financial and non financial performance information. The budgeted revenue of 51.8 million for 2022 23 has increased by 7.0 million since the March 2022 23 Portfolio Budget Statements were prepared. Budgeted expenditure of 49.3 million for 2022 23 has increased by 7.0 million since the March 2022 23 Portfolio Budget Statements were prepared. NOPSEMA presents an annual report to stakeholders on cost effectiveness of its operations, in accordance with the legislation contained within the Offshore Petroleum and Greenhouse Gas Storage Regulatory Levies Regulations 2004.  Portfolio Budget Statements National Offshore Petroleum Safety and Environmental Management Authority Page 193 3.2 Budgeted financial statements tables Table 3.1 Comprehensive income statement showing net cost of services for the period ended 30 June 2021 22 Estimated actual 000 2022 23 Budget 000 2023 24 Forward estimate 000 2024 25 Forward estimate 000 2025 26 Forward estimate 000 EXPENSES Employee benefits 30,636 34,785 36,526 39,607 34,226 Suppliers 3,858 11,721 9,633 5,129 5,256 Depreciation and amortisation 4,262 2,684 4,439 4,988 5,005 Finance Costs 34 117 168 139 111 Total expenses 38,790 49,307 50,766 49,863 44,598 LESS OWN SOURCE INCOME Own source revenue Interest 45 40 40 40 40 Sublease interest income 11 30 41 33 26 Other 2,210 1,259 814 622 629 Total own source revenue 2,266 1,329 895 695 695 Total own source income 2,266 1,329 895 695 695 Net cost of contribution by services 36,524 47,978 49,871 49,168 43,903 Revenue from Government a 41,919 50,482 47,943 44,964 39,327 Surplus deficit attributable to the Australian Government 5,395 2,504 1,928 4,204 4,576 Total comprehensive income loss 5,395 2,504 1,928 4,204 4,576 Total comprehensive income loss attributable to the Australian Government 5,395 2,504 1,928 4,204 4,576 Note Impact of net cash appropriation arrangements Total comprehensive income loss as per statement of Comprehensive Income 5,395 2,504 1,928 4,204 4,576 plus depreciation amortisation expenses for ROU assets b 1,147 1,051 1,639 1,639 1,639 less lease principal repayments b 3,097 1,676 2,555 2,617 2,746 Net Cash Operating Surplus Deficit 3,445 3,129 1,012 3,226 3,469 Prepared on Australian Accounting Standards basis. a NOPSEMA became a corporate Commonwealth entity on 1 July 2014 and receives the majority of its funding through a special appropriation which is administered through the Department of Industry, Science and Resources. This funding is equal in value to the levies NOPSEMA collects from the oil and gas industries. b Applies leases under AASB 16.   Portfolio Budget Statements Page 194 National Offshore Petroleum Safety and Environmental Management Authority Table 3.2 Budgeted departmental balance sheet as at 30 June 2021 22 Estimated actual 000 2022 23 Budget 000 2023 24 Forward estimate 000 2024 25 Forward estimate 000 2025 26 Forward estimate 000 ASSETS Financial assets Cash and cash equivalents 26,572 29,631 26,763 19,437 11,766 Trade and other receivables 6,888 8,711 8,029 8,545 7,802 Other financial assets 3,416 3,416 3,416 3,416 3,416 Total financial assets 36,876 41,758 38,208 31,398 22,984 Non financial assets Land and buildings 6,856 11,559 9,886 10,290 9,527 Property, plant and equipment 307 307 307 307 307 Intangibles 867 598 1,492 3,636 5,624 Other non financial assets 338 338 338 338 338 Total non financial assets 8,368 12,802 12,023 14,571 15,796 Total assets 45,244 54,560 50,231 45,969 38,780 LIABILITIES Payables Suppliers 797 797 797 797 797 Other payables 1,347 1,347 1,347 1,347 1,347 Total payables 2,144 2,144 2,144 2,144 2,144 Interest bearing liabilities Leases 9,409 16,221 13,820 13,762 11,149 Total interest bearing liabilities 9,409 16,221 13,820 13,762 11,149 Provisions Employee provisions 7,331 7,331 7,331 7,331 7,331 Other provisions 98 98 98 98 98 Total provisions 7,429 7,429 7,429 7,429 7,429 Total liabilities 18,982 25,794 23,393 23,335 20,722 Net assets 26,262 28,766 26,838 22,634 18,058 EQUITY Parent entity interest Contributed equity 2,361 2,361 2,361 2,361 2,361 Retained surplus accumulated deficit 23,901 26,405 24,477 20,273 15,697 Total parent entity interest 26,262 28,766 26,838 22,634 18,058 Total equity 26,262 28,766 26,838 22,634 18,058 Prepared on Australian Accounting Standards basis. Equity is the residual interest in assets after deduction of liabilities.  Portfolio Budget Statements National Offshore Petroleum Safety and Environmental Management Authority Page 195 Table 3.3 Departmental statement of changes in equity summary of movement Budget year 2022 23 Retained earnings 000 Contributed equity capital 000 Total equity 000 Opening balance as at 1 July 2022 Balance carried forward from previous period 23,901 2,361 26,262 Adjusted opening balance 23,901 2,361 26,262 Comprehensive income Surplus deficit for the period 2,504 2,504 Total comprehensive income 2,504 2,504 of which Attributable to the Australian Government 2,504 2,504 Estimated closing balance as at 30 June 2023 26,405 2,361 28,766 Closing balance attributable to the Australian Government 26,405 2,361 28,766 Prepared on Australian Accounting Standards basis. Equity is the residual interest in assets after the deduction of liabilities.   Portfolio Budget Statements Page 196 National Offshore Petroleum Safety and Environmental Management Authority Table 3.4 Budgeted departmental statement of cash flows for the period ended 30 June 2021 22 Estimated actual 000 2022 23 Budget 000 2023 24 Forward estimate 000 2024 25 Forward estimate 000 2025 26 Forward estimate 000 OPERATING ACTIVITIES Cash received Receipts from Government 41,919 50,482 47,943 44,964 39,327 Sale of goods and rendering of services 775 941 911 33 26 Interest 45 40 40 40 40 Other 906 1,259 814 622 629 Total cash received 40,283 52,722 49,708 45,659 40,022 Cash used Employees 30,649 34,785 36,526 39,607 34,226 Suppliers 1,020 11,721 9,633 5,129 5,256 Interest payments on lease liability 231 117 168 139 111 Total cash used 31,438 46,623 46,327 44,875 39,593 Net cash from used by operating activities 8,845 6,099 3,381 784 429 INVESTING ACTIVITIES Cash used Purchase of property, plant and equipment and intangibles 1,102 1,364 3,694 5,493 5,354 Total cash used 1,102 1,364 3,694 5,493 5,354 Net cash from used by investing activities 1,102 1,364 3,694 5,493 5,354 FINANCING ACTIVITIES Cash received Contributed equity 1,465 Total cash received 1,465 Cash used Principal payments on lease liability 3,097 1,676 2,555 2,617 2,746 Total cash used 3,097 1,676 2,555 2,617 2,746 Net cash from used by financing activities 1,632 1,676 2,555 2,617 2,746 Net increase decrease in cash held 6,111 3,059 2,868 7,326 7,671 Cash and cash equivalents at the beginning of the reporting period 20,461 26,572 29,631 26,763 19,437 Cash and cash equivalents at the end of the reporting period 26,572 29,631 26,763 19,437 11,766 Prepared on Australian Accounting Standards basis.  Portfolio Budget Statements National Offshore Petroleum Safety and Environmental Management Authority Page 197 Table 3.5 Departmental capital budget statement for the period ended 30 June 2021 22 Estimated actual 000 2022 23 Budget 000 2023 24 Forward estimate 000 2024 25 Forward estimate 000 2025 26 Forward estimate 000 PURCHASE OF NON FINANCIAL ASSETS Funded internally from departmental resources a b 1,000 1,364 3,694 5,493 5,354 TOTAL 1,000 1,364 3,694 5,493 5,354 RECONCILIATION OF CASH USED TO ACQUIRE ASSETS TO ASSET MOVEMENT TABLE Total purchases 1,000 1,364 3,694 5,493 5,354 Total cash used to acquire assets 1,000 1,364 3,694 5,493 5,354 Prepared on Australian Accounting Standards basis. a Includes the following s74 external receipts sponsorship, subsidy, gifts or similar contribution internally developed assets own source revenue and proceeds from the sale of assets. b NOPSEMA became a Corporate Commonwealth entity on 1 July 2014 and receives the majority of its funding through a special appropriation which is administered through the Department of Industry, Science and Resources. This funding is equal in value to the levies NOPSEMA collects from the oil and gas industries.   Portfolio Budget Statements Page 198 National Offshore Petroleum Safety and Environmental Management Authority Table 3.6 Statement of departmental asset movements Budget year 2022 23 Buildings 000 Other property, plant and equipment 000 Computer software and intangibles 000 Total 000 As at 1 July 2022 Gross book value 4,967 2,276 9,543 16,786 Gross book value ROU assets 14,114 14,114 Accumulated depreciation amortisation and impairment 4,746 1,969 8,676 15,391 Accumulated depreciation amortisation and impairment ROU assets 7,479 7,479 Opening net book balance 6,856 307 867 8,030 Capital asset additions Estimated expenditure on new or replacement assets By purchase other 600 764 1,364 By purchase other ROU assets 8,488 8,488 Total additions 8,488 600 764 9,852 Other movements Depreciation amortisation expense 1,051 600 1,033 2,684 Other ROU assets 2,734 2,734 Total other movements 3,785 600 1,033 5,418 As at 30 June 2023 Gross book value 4,967 2,876 10,307 18,150 Gross book value ROU assets 19,868 19,868 Accumulated depreciation amortisation and impairment 5,797 2,569 9,709 18,075 Accumulated depreciation amortisation and impairment ROU assets 7,479 7,479 Closing net book balance 11,559 307 598 12,464 Prepared on Australian Accounting Standards basis.  Portfolio Budget Statements National Offshore Petroleum Safety and Environmental Management Authority Page 199 Table 3.7 Schedule of budgeted income and expenses administered on behalf of Government for the period ended 30 June NOPSEMA has no budgeted income and expenses administered on behalf of Government therefore Table 3.7 is not presented. Table 3.8 Schedule of budgeted assets and liabilities administered on behalf of Government as at 30 June NOPSEMA has no budgeted assets and liabilities administered on behalf of Government therefore Table 3.8 is not presented. Table 3.9 Schedule of budgeted administered cash flows for the period ended 30 June NOPSEMA has no budgeted administered cash flows therefore Table 3.9 is not presented. Table 3.10 Administered capital budget statement for the period ended 30 June NOPSEMA has no administered capital budget therefore Table 3.10 is not presented. Table 3.11 Statement of administered asset movements Budget year 2022 23 NOPSEMA has no administered asset movements therefore Table 3.11 is not presented. 