N A T I O N A L S C I E N C E F O U N D A T I O N PROPOSAL AND AWARD POLICIES AND PROCEDURES GUIDE Effective January 30, 2023 NSF 23 1 OMB Control Number 3145 0058   Summary of Changes to the Proposal Award Policies Procedures Guide PAPPG NSF 23 1 Effective Date January 30, 2023 Overall Document Editorial changes have been made throughout to either clarify or enhance the intended meaning of a sentence or section. References to Research.gov have been incorporated throughout, as part of the final transition from FastLane to Research.gov for proposal preparation and submission. Website and document references have been updated to reflect current information. Updates have been made to ensure consistency with data contained in NSF systems or guidance located and terminology used in other NSF or Federal policy documents. By Chapter Changes Chapter I Pre Submission Information Chapters I.A, NSF Proposal Preparation and Submission and I.C, Categories of Funding Opportunities, have been updated to address NSF s use of the Broad Agency Announcement BAA and the associated Broad Agency Announcement Management System BAAM . Chapter I.D, Types of Submissions, includes new coverage on the use of concept outlines and the use of the Program Suitability and Proposal Concept Tool ProSPCT for submission. Additional changes on the use of concept outlines and the use of ProSPCT for specific proposal types is available in Chapter II.E. Chapter I.E, Who May Submit Proposals, was revised to clarify eligibility requirements of For Profit Organizations, and State and local governments. New coverage on the eligibility of Tribal Governments also has been included. Chapter I.E.3, Unaffiliated Individuals, has been modified to specify that individuals submitting proposals in response to postdoctoral fellowships are not considered unaffiliated individuals.   Chapter I.G.2, Requirements Relating to Unique Entity Identifier UEI and Registration in the System for Award Management SAM , has been modified to clarify that subrecipients named in a proposal must obtain a UEI and register in Research.gov, however, they do not need to be registered in SAM. Chapter II Proposal Preparation Instructions Chapter II.B, NSF Disclosure Requirements, incorporates a new section describing specific NSF disclosures, the sections of the PAPPG they apply to and the consequences for violating these requirements. Chapter II.D.1.d, Proposal Certifications Provided by the Organization, was modified to include a new certification by the AOR relating to the William M. Mac Thornberry National Defense Authorization Act for Fiscal Year 2021 requiring that senior personnel are made aware of the certification requirements required by the Act. A second new certification regarding Responsible and Ethical Conduct of Research RECR was added for proposals submitted on or after July 31, 2023. The certification replaces the existing RECR certification and expands the training requirement to faculty and other senior personnel and mandates that the training cover mentor training and mentorship. A third new certification requires the AOR to certify that any organization proposing to conduct research off campus or off site has a plan in place for this proposal regarding safe and inclusive working environments. Chapter II.D.1.e, Certification Requirement for Senior Personnel Specified in the William M. Mac Thornberry National Defense Authorization Act for Fiscal Year 2021, is a new certification requiring senior personnel to certify that the information provided in their Biographical Sketch and Current and Pending Support documents are accurate, current, and complete. This certification will be included in both SciENcv and the NSF fillable format for proposals submitted or due on or after January 30, 2023. Chapter II.D.2, Sections of the Proposal, identifies a new checkbox on the NSF Cover Sheet Off Campus or Off Site Research. Chapter II.D.2.f vi e , Subawards, has been clarified regarding the need to obtain prior NSF approval if a subaward organization has changed after an award has been made. Chapter II.D.2.f viii , Indirect Costs, has been revised to provide greater clarity for organizations that do not have a current negotiated indirect cost rate agreement and wish to request indirect cost rate recovery above the 10 de minimus rate. Chapter II.D.2.h i , Biographical Sketch es , has been revised to increase standardization with the Common Disclosure Form for the Biographical Sketch that has been developed in compliance with NSPM 33 Implementation Guidance. NSF has made every effort to mirror the Common Form. Due to timing disparities between the issuance of the Common Form and the PAPPG, however, it is possible that variances may occur. This section also has been revised to require the use of SciENcv for the preparation of this document effective in October 2023. Chapter II.D.2.h ii , Current and Pending Other Support, has been revised to increase standardization with the Common Form for Current and Pending Other Support   that has been developed in compliance with NSPM 33 Implementation Guidance. NSF has made every effort to mirror the Common Form. Due to timing disparities between the issuance of the Common Form and the PAPPG, however, it is possible that variances may occur. This section also has been revised to require the use of SciENcv for the preparation of this document effective in October 2023. Also, in accordance with NSPM 33 Implementation Guidance, NSF program officers will request updated Current and Pending Other Support prior to making a funding recommendation. Chapter II.E.5, Proposals Involving Human Subjects, provides greater flexibility in the form that a determination notice must take. The section also clarifies that a PI may conduct preliminary work that does not involve human subjects while the protocol is being developed or under review, consistent with organizational guidelines. Chapter II.E.6, Potential Life Sciences Dual Use Research of Concern DURC , has been updated with new requirements for situations where a decision has been made to fund a proposal and use of a select agent is identified. Additional language also has been added to specify that NSF will not fund research that involves the creation, transfer, or use of enhanced potential pandemic pathogens except under special circumstances. Chapter II.E.9, Safe and Inclusive Working Environments for Off Campus or Off Site Research, describes the new requirement for the AOR to certify that an organization has a plan in place for safe and inclusive research for any proposal that proposes to conduct off campus or off site research. This section also provides considerations for plan development, communication, and dissemination. Chapter II.F, Other Types of Proposals, includes the requirement to submit a Concept Outline for the following proposal types Planning, Rapid Response Research RAPID , Early concept Grants for Exploratory Research EAGER , and Research Advanced by Interdisciplinary Science and Engineering RAISE prior to the submission of a full proposal. The coverage also identifies the Program Suitability and Proposal Concept Tool ProSPCT as an option for use in submission of the Concept Outline. Chapter II.F.5, Grant Opportunities for Academic Liaison with Industry GOALI Proposal, has been modified to permit non SBIR small businesses to receive funding and includes specific guidance on the eligibility of small business to receive funding under a GOALI award. Chapter VII Award Administration Chapter VII.D, Technical Reporting Requirements, has been clarified to indicate when NSF required reports become overdue. Chapter IX Recipient Standards Chapter IX.B.1, Responsible and Ethical Conduct of Research RECR , has been amended to apply the requirement to provide appropriate training and oversight in the responsible and ethical conduct of research to undergraduate students, graduate students, postdoctoral researchers, faculty, and other senior personnel. The revised section also identifies that the content of the training must address mentor training and mentorship.   Chapter IX.C, Research Security, has been added as a new section on NSF policy on research security including the overall goals of NSF s research security initiatives, organizational requirements for post award disclosure of current support and in kind contribution information, and when PIs and co PIs must update current support in annual and final project reports. Chapter X Allowability of Costs Chapter X.C.1, Build America, Buy America, and Made in America Statutes, incorporates information about the Build America, Buy America provisions of the Infrastructure Investment and Jobs Act. Chapter X.D.2, NSF Cognizant Organizations, includes additional information for when NSF is the cognizant agency for indirect costs. Chapter XI Other Post Award Requirements and Considerations Chapter XI.B.1, Protection of Living Organisms, includes clarifying language for when IRB approval is required for awards involving human subjects. Chapter XI.B.5, Potential Life Sciences Dual Use Research of Concern DURC , includes additional information for recipients on DURC policy requirements. Chapter XI.J, Historic Properties, provides clarifying language on research on historic properties as required by the National Historic Preservation Act NHPA . Chapter XI.K, Environmental Considerations, incorporates language on anticipated and unanticipated environmental impacts. Chapter XI.M, Scientific Integrity, includes a new section on NSF scientific integrity for organizations and individuals, as well as identifying appropriate NSF offices to report allegations regarding failures to adhere to scientific integrity principles. The new section also reminds organizations and individuals that the principles and requirements that support scientific integrity are integral to multiple topics specified in the PAPPG.  Proposal Award Policies Procedures Guide i NSF 23 1 PROPOSAL AWARD POLICIES PROCEDURES GUIDE PAPPG Table of Contents Introduction A. About the National Science Foundation B. Foreword C. Acronym List D. Definitions NSF Recipient Relationships E. NSF Organizations Part I Proposal Preparation and Submission Guidelines Chapter I Pre Submission Information I 1 A. NSF Proposal Preparation and Submission I 1 B. NSF Programs and Funding Opportunities I 1 C. Categories of Funding Opportunities I 2 1. Program Descriptions I 2 2. Program Announcements I 2 3. Program Solicitations I 2 4. Broad Agency Announcements BAAs I 3 5. Dear Colleague Letters DCLs I 3 D. Types of Submissions I 3 1. Concept Outlines I 3 2. Letters of Intent LOIs I 3 3. Preliminary Proposals I 4 a. Invite Not Invite Decisions I 4 b. Encourage Discourage Decisions I 4 4. Full Proposals I 5 E. Who May Submit Proposals I 5 Categories of Proposers. I 6 F. When to Submit Proposals I 8 1. Target Dates I 8 2. Deadline Dates I 8 3. Submission Windows I 8 Special Exceptions to NSF s Deadline Date Policy I 8 Natural or Anthropogenic Events I 8 Closure of NSF I 9 G. How to Submit Proposals I 9 1. Submission Instructions I 9 2. Requirements Relating to Unique Entity Identifier UEI and Registration in the System for Award Management SAM I 9 3. NSF ID I 10 4. Proposal Receipt I 10 H. Proposal Processing I 10  Proposal Award Policies Procedures Guide ii NSF 23 1 Chapter II Proposal Preparation Instructions II 1 A. Conformance with Instructions for Proposal Preparation II 1 1. Deviations from NSF Proposal Preparation and Submission Requirements II 1 2. Requests for Reasonable and Accessibility Accommodations II 1 B. NSF Disclosure Requirements II 2 C. Format of the Proposal II 3 1. Proposal Pagination Instructions II 4 2. Proposal Font, Spacing and Margin Requirements II 4 3. Page Formatting II 4 D. Proposal Contents II 4 1. Single Copy Documents II 4 a. Authorization to Deviate from NSF Proposal Preparation Requirements II 5 b. List of Suggested Reviewers or Reviewers Not to Include II 5 c. Proprietary or Privileged Information. II 5 d. Proposal Certifications Provided by the Organization. II 5 e. Certification Provided by Senior Personnel II 7 f. Submission of Proposals by Former NSF Staff II 7 2. Sections of the Proposal II 7 a. Cover Sheet II 8 b. Project Summary II 10 c. Table of Contents II 11 d. Project Description II 11 i Content II 11 ii Page Limitations and Inclusion of Uniform Resource Locators URLs within the Project Description II 12 iii Results from Prior NSF Support. II 12 iv Unfunded Collaborations II 13 v Group Proposals II 13 vi Proposals for Renewed Support II 13 e. References Cited. II 13 f. Budget and Budget Justification II 13 i Salaries and Wages II 14 a Senior Personnel Salaries Wages Policy II 14 b Administrative and Clerical Salaries Wages Policy II 14 c Procedures II 15 d Confidential Budgetary Information II 15 ii Fringe Benefits II 15 iii Equipment II 15 iv Travel II 16 a General II 16 b Domestic Travel II 16 c Foreign Travel II 16 v Participant Support II 16 vi Other Direct Costs II 17 a Materials and Supplies including Costs of Computing Devices II 17 b Publication Documentation Dissemination II 18 c Consultant Services also referred to as Professional Service Costs II 18 d Computer Services II 18 e Subawards II 18 f Other II 19 vii Total Direct Costs II 19 viii Indirect Costs II 19 ix Total Direct and Indirect Costs II 20 x Fees II 20 xi Amount of This Request II 20 xii Cost Sharing. II 20  Proposal Award Policies Procedures Guide iii NSF 23 1 xiii Allowable and Unallowable Costs II 21 a Entertainment II 21 b Meals and Coffee Breaks II 22 c Alcoholic Beverages II 22 d Home Office Workspace II 22 e Prohibition on Certain Telecommunications and Video Surveillance Services or Equipment II 22 g. Facilities, Equipment and Other Resources II 22 h. Senior Personnel Documents II 23 i Biographical Sketch es II 23 a Senior Personnel II 23 b Other Personnel II 26 c Equipment Proposals II 26 ii Current and Pending Support II 26 iii Collaborators Other Affiliations Information II 30 i. Special Information and Supplementary Documentation II 31 i Postdoctoral Researcher Mentoring Plan II 31 ii Plans for Data Management and Sharing of the Products of Research II 32 iii Rationale for Performance of All or Part of the Project Off campus or Away from Organizational Headquarters II 32 iv Documentation of Collaborative Arrangements of Significance to the Proposal through Letters of Collaboration II 32 v Federal Environmental Statutes II 33 vi Antarctic Proposals II 33 vii Research in a Location Designated, or Eligible to be Designated, a Registered Historic Place II 33 viii Research Involving Field Experiments with Genetically Engineered Organisms II 33 ix Documentation Regarding Research Involving the Use of Human Subjects, Hazardous Materials, Live Vertebrate Animals, or Endangered Species II 33 x Special Components in New Proposals or in Requests for Supplemental Funding II 33 E. Special Processing Instructions II 34 1. Proprietary or Privileged Information II 34 2. Beginning Investigators applies to proposals submitted to the Biological Sciences Directorate only II 34 3. Collaborative Proposals II 34 4. Proposals Involving Live Vertebrate Animals II 36 5. Proposals Involving Human Subjects II 37 6. Potential Life Sciences Dual Use Research of Concern DURC II 39 7. Projects Requiring High Performance Computing Resources, Data Infrastructure or Advanced Visualization Resources II 39 8. International Activities II 40 9. Safe and Inclusive Working Environments for Off Campus or Off Site Research II 41 F. Other Types of Proposals. II 41 1. Planning Proposal II 41 2. Rapid Response Research RAPID II 43 3. EArly concept Grants for Exploratory Research EAGER II 44 4. Research Advanced by Interdisciplinary Science and Engineering RAISE II 46 5. Grant Opportunities for Academic Liaison with Industry GOALI II 46 6. Ideas Lab II 48 7. Facilitation Awards for Scientists and Engineers with Disabilities FASED II 49 8. Career Life Balance CLB Supplemental Funding Requests II 50 9. Conference Proposal. II 52 10. Equipment Proposal II 54 11. Travel Proposal II 56 12. Center Proposal II 57  Proposal Award Policies Procedures Guide iv NSF 23 1 13. Research Infrastructure Proposal II 58 Exhibit II 1 Proposal Preparation Checklist II 59 Exhibit II 2 Potentially Disqualifying Conflicts of Interest II 63 Exhibit II 3 Definitions of Categories of Personnel II 64 Chapter III NSF Proposal Processing and Review III 1 A. Merit Review Principles and Criteria III 1 Intellectual Merit III 2 Broader Impacts III 2 B. Selection of Reviewers III 3 C. Proposal File Updates III 3 D. Revisions to Proposals Made During the Review Process III 4 E. Funding Recommendation III 4 F. NSF s Decision to Award or Decline Proposals III 5 G. Review Information Provided to PI III 7 H. Release of Recipient Proposal Information III 7 Exhibit III 1 NSF Proposal Award Process Timeline III 8 Chapter IV Non Award Decisions and Transactions IV 1 A. Proposal Withdrawal IV 1 B. Proposal Not Accepted or Returned Without Review IV 2 C. Declinations IV 2 D. Reconsideration IV 2 E. Resubmission IV 5 Chapter V Renewal Proposals V 1 A. Traditional Renewal V 1 B. Accomplishment Based Renewal V 1 Part II Award, Administration and Monitoring of NSF Assistance Awards Chapter VI NSF Awards VI 1 A. Acceptance of Assistance Agreements VI 1 B. Award Instrument VI 1 C. NSF Award Conditions VI 2 D. NSF Award Periods VI 2 1. Definitions VI 2 2. Significance of Award Period VI 2 3. Changes in an Award Period VI 2 a. Start Date VI 2 b. End Date VI 2 c. No Cost Extension VI 3 d. Two Year Extensions for Special Creativity VI 3 E. Additional Funding Support VI 4 1. Types of Additional Funding Support VI 4 2. Renewed Support VI 4 3. Support under Continuing Grants VI 4 4. Cooperative Agreement Increments VI 4 5. Supplemental Support VI 5  Proposal Award Policies Procedures Guide v NSF 23 1 Chapter VII Award Administration VII 1 A. Monitoring Project Performance VII 1 1. Recipient Responsibilities VII 1 2. Recipient Notifications to NSF VII 1 B. Changes in Project Direction or Management VII 2 1. Changes in Objectives, Scope, or Methods Procedures VII 2 a. Changes in Objectives or Scope VII 2 b. Significant Changes in Methods or Procedures VII 2 c. Significant Changes, Delays, or Events of Unusual Interest VII 2 2. Changes in PI, co PI, or Person Months Devoted to the Project at the Initiation of the Recipient Organization VII 2 a. Long Term Disengagement of PI or co PI VII 3 b. Changes in Person Months Devoted to the Project VII 3 c. Addition of co PI VII 3 d. Withdrawal of PI or co PI VII 3 e. Substitute Change PI or co PI VII 4 f. Disposition of an Award When a PI Transfers from One Organization to Another Organization VII 4 3. Changes in PI, co PI, or Person Months Devoted to the Project at the Initiation of NSF VII 5 4. Subawarding or Transferring Part of an NSF Award Subaward VII 6 5. Postaward Additions of Postdoctoral Scholars. VII 6 C. Cost Sharing VII 6 D. Technical Reporting Requirements VII 7 1. Annual Project Reports VII 8 2. Final Annual Project Report VII 8 3. Project Outcomes Report for the General Public VII 9 4. Compliance with Technical Reporting Requirements VII 10 5. Award Closeout VII 10 E. Record Retention and Audit VII 10 Chapter VIII Financial Requirements and Payments VIII 1 A. Standards for Financial Management VIII 1 B. Definitions VIII 1 C. Payment Requirements VIII 2 1. Requesting Payments VIII 2 2. Payment Policies VIII 3 3. Request for Payment. VIII 3 4. Special Payment Recipients VIII 4 5. Working Capital Advance VIII 4 6. Recipient Banking Information for Payments VIII 4 D. Cash Refunds and Credits To NSF VIII 4 1. Final Unobligated Balance VIII 4 2. Erroneous Payments VIII 4 3. Interest Earned on Advance Payments. VIII 5 4. Program Income VIII 6 5. Other Cost Credits VIII 7 E. Award Financial Reporting Requirements and Final Disbursement VIII 7 Chapter IX Recipient Standards IX 1 A. Conflict of Interest Policies IX 1 B. Responsible and Ethical Conduct of Research RECR IX 3 1. Background IX 3 2. Institutional Responsibilities IX 4 3. NSF s Responsibilities. IX 4  Proposal Award Policies Procedures Guide vi NSF 23 1 C. Research Security IX 4 D. Financial Management Systems Standards. IX 5 E. Property Management Standards IX 5 1. Title to Equipment IX 5 2. Conditions for Acquisition and Use of Property and Equipment IX 6 3. Property Management Requirements for Federally owned Property IX 6 4. Principles Relating to Use of NSF Supported Research Instrumentation Facilities IX 7 5. Excess Government Personal Property IX 7 F. Procurement Standards IX 11 Chapter X Allowability of Costs X 1 A. Basic Considerations X 1 1. Conflicting Guidelines. X 1 2. Other Considerations X 1 a. Maximum Obligation X 1 b. Pre Award Costs X 1 c. Post End Date Costs X 2 3. Prior Written Approvals X 2 B. Direct Costs X 3 1. Compensation Personal Services X 3 a. Salaries and Wages X 3 b. Fringe Benefits X 3 2. Intra University IHE Consulting X 3 3. Federal Employees X 3 C. Other Direct Costs X 4 1. Build America, Buy America, and Made in America Statutes X 4 2. News Release Costs X 4 3. Travel and Temporary Dependent Care Costs X 4 D. Indirect Costs X 5 1. NSF Policy X 5 2. NSF Cognizant Organizations X 6 E. Fee Payments under NSF Awards X 7 F. Prohibition on Certain Telecommunications and Video Surveillance Services or Equipment X 7 Chapter XI Other Post Award Requirements and Considerations XI 1 A. Non Discrimination Statutes and Regulations. XI 1 1. General XI 1 NSF Policy on Sexual Harassment, Other Forms of Harassment, or Sexual Assault XI 2 2. Title VI of the Civil Rights Act of 1964 XI 2 3. Section 504 of the Rehabilitation Act of 1973 XI 3 4. Title IX of the Education Amendments of 1972 XI 3 5. Age Discrimination Act of 1975 XI 4 6. Equal Employment Opportunity under E.O. 11246 XI 5 7. Limited English Proficiency under E.O. 13166 XI 5 B. Protection of Living Organisms XI 5 1. Human Subjects XI 5 2. Research Involving Recombinant or Synthetic Nucleic Acid Molecules XI 6 3. Live Vertebrate Animals XI 7 4. Government Permits and Activities Abroad XI 8 5. Potential Life Sciences Dual Use Research of Concern DURC XI 8 C. Construction, Rearrangements and Reconversions XI 9 1. Davis Bacon Act XI 9 2. Bonding and Insurance XI 9 3. Seismic Safety of Buildings XI 9 D. Intellectual Property XI 9 1. Patents and Inventions XI 9  Proposal Award Policies Procedures Guide vii NSF 23 1 2. Copyright X 16 3. Special Patent and Copyright Situations XI 17 4. Dissemination and Sharing of Research Results XI 18 5. Tangible Property XI 18 E. Publication Distribution of Award Materials XI 19 1. NSF Policy XI 19 2. Costs XI 19 3. Responsibilities XI 19 4. Recipient Obligations XI 19 F. International Considerations XI 20 1. Travel to Foreign Countries XI 20 a. Policy XI 20 b. Use of U.S. Flag Air Carriers XI 20 c. Use of Foreign Flag Air Carriers XI 21 2. Charter Flights XI 22 3. Projects in a Foreign Country XI 22 4. Passports and Visas. XI 22 G. Intergovernmental Review of Federal Programs XI 23 H. Handling of Information XI 23 1. Questionnaires Data Collection Under NSF Awards XI 23 2. Release of Information by NSF XI 23 I. Tax Status XI 24 J. Historic Properties XI 24 K. Environmental Considerations XI 24 L. National Security XI 24 M. Scientific Integrity XI 25 N. Miscellaneous XI 26 1. Liabilities and Losses XI 26 2. Pre College Students and Experimental Curriculum Development Projects XI 26 3. Use of Metric Measurements XI 26 Chapter XII Award Administration Disputes and Misconduct XII 1 A. Suspension and Termination Procedures XII 1 1. Definitions XII 1 2. Suspension and Termination XII 1 3. Termination by Mutual Agreement XII 2 4. NSF Suspension or Termination Review Procedure XII 3 B. Informal Resolution of Award Administration Disputes XII 3 C. Research Misconduct XII 4 1. NSF Policies and Responsibilities XII 4 2. Role of Recipients XII 5 3. Reporting Possible Misconduct XII 6 Subject Index Privacy Act and Public Burden Statements  Proposal Award Policies Procedures Guide viii NSF 23 1 Introduction A. About the National Science Foundation The National Science Foundation NSF is an independent Federal agency created by Congress in 1950 to promote the progress of science and to advance the national health, prosperity, and welfare by supporting research and education in all fields of science and engineering. From those first days, NSF has had a unique place in the Federal Government it is responsible for the overall health of science and engineering across all disciplines. In contrast, other Federal agencies support research focused on specific missions such as health or defense. The Foundation also is committed to ensuring the nation s supply of scientists, engineers, and science and engineering educators. NSF highly encourages the leadership, partnership, and contributions of individuals who are members of groups underrepresented and or underserved in STEM education programs and careers in all NSF opportunities. This includes leading and designing STEM research and education proposals for funding serving as peer reviewers, advisory committee members, and or committee of visitor members and serving as NSF leadership, program, and or administrative staff. NSF strongly promotes and expects that all individuals, including those from groups that are underrepresented and or underserved in STEM are treated equitably and inclusively in the Foundation s proposal and award process. NSF encourages institutions of higher education IHEs that enroll, educate, graduate and employ individuals who are members of groups underrepresented and or underserved in STEM education programs and careers to lead, partner, and contribute to NSF opportunities, including leading and designing STEM research and education proposals for funding. NSF funds research and education in most fields of science and engineering. It does this through grants and cooperative agreements to approximately 3,000 institutions of higher education, K 12 school systems, businesses, informal science organizations and other research organizations throughout the U.S. The Foundation accounts for about one fourth of Federal support to IHEs for basic research. The Foundation considers proposals1 submitted by organizations on behalf of individuals or groups for support in most fields of research. Interdisciplinary proposals also are eligible for consideration. NSF does not normally support technical assistance, pilot plant efforts, research requiring security classification, the development of products for commercial marketing, or market research for a particular project or invention. Biological research on mechanisms of disease in humans, including on the etiology, diagnosis, or treatment of disease or disorder, is normally not supported. Biological research to develop animal models of such conditions, or the development or testing of procedures for their treatment, also are not normally eligible for support. However, research with etiology, diagnosis or treatment related goals that advances knowledge in engineering, mathematical, physical, computer, or information sciences is eligible for support. Bioengineering and assistive information technology research to aid persons with disabilities also are eligible. The agency operates no laboratories itself but does support National Research Centers, user facilities, certain oceanographic vessels, and Antarctic research stations. See Funding and Awards on the NSF website for additional information. NSF receives more than 43,600 proposals each year for research, education, and training projects, of which approximately 11,300 are funded. In addition, the Foundation receives more than 13,000 applications for graduate and postdoctoral fellowships. One of NSF s flagship programs, the NSF Graduate Research Fellowship Program GRFP helps ensure the vitality and diversity of the scientific and engineering workforce the program awards about 2,000 fellowships each year. Guidance regarding the GRFP program may be found in the program solicitation, as well as in the GRFP Administrative Guide. The Foundation also supports cooperative research between IHEs and industry, technical research and development on innovations from the small business community, U.S. participation in international scientific and engineering 1 For purposes of this Guide, the term proposal is interchangeable with the term application.  Proposal Award Policies Procedures Guide ix NSF 23 1 efforts, and educational activities at every academic level. For example, the Directorate for Technology, Innovation and Partnerships TIP collaborates with all the NSF directorates to advance critical and emerging technologies addressing societal and economic challenges and opportunities accelerate the translation of research results from the lab to market and society and cultivate new education pathways leading to a diverse skilled technical workforce comprising researchers, practitioners, technicians, and entrepreneurs. TIP accomplishes these objectives by catalyzing strategic partnerships that link IHEs, industry, government, nonprofits, civil society, and communities of practice to cultivate innovation ecosystems throughout the U.S., growing regional economies, creating the jobs of the future, and enhancing the Nation s long term competitiveness. Through TIP, America s Seed Fund powered by NSF the Small Business Innovation Research SBIR and Small Business Technology Transfer STTR programs annually provides approximately 400 startups and small businesses with research and development R D funding to create and develop a prototype or conduct proof of concept work, as the foundation for the introduction of innovative new products or services, getting research, much of it NSF funded, out of the lab and into the market. NSF s Innovation Corps I Corps program supports NSF funded researchers in the form of entrepreneurial education, mentoring and funding to accelerate the translation of knowledge derived from fundamental research into emerging products and services. Scientists and engineers can also increase the impact of their NSF funded research discoveries by developing their technology into a prototype or proof of concept through the Partnerships for Innovation PFI program, one of the National Science Foundation s technology translation programs. Guidance regarding the NSF s SBIR, STTR, I Corps and PFI programs may be found in their respective program solicitations. NSF is structured much like an IHE with divisions offices for the various disciplines and fields of science and engineering and for STEM education. NSF also uses a variety of management mechanisms to coordinate research in areas that cross traditional disciplinary boundaries. The Foundation is assisted by advisors from the scientific and engineering communities who serve on formal committees or as ad hoc reviewers of proposals. This advisory system, which focuses on both program directions and specific proposals, involves approximately 50,000 scientists and engineers each year. NSF staff members who are experts in a certain field or area make award recommendations Principal Investigators PIs receive unattributed verbatim copies of peer reviews. Recipients are wholly responsible for conducting their project activities and preparing the results for publication. Thus, the Foundation does not assume responsibility for such findings or their interpretation. NSF has Telecommunications Device for the Deaf TDD and Federal Information Relay Service FIRS capabilities that enable individuals with hearing or speech impairments to communicate with the Foundation about NSF programs, employment, or general information. TDD may be accessed at 703 292 5090 and 800 281 8749, FIRS at 800 877 8339. The NSF Information Center may be reached at 703 292 5111.  Proposal Award Policies Procedures Guide x NSF 23 1 B. Foreword The Proposal Award Policies Procedures Guide PAPPG is comprised of documents relating to the Foundation s proposal and award process for the assistance programs of NSF. The PAPPG, in conjunction with the applicable standard award conditions incorporated by reference in the award2, serve as the Foundation s implementation of 2 CFR 200, Uniform Administrative Requirements, Cost Principles, and Audit Requirements for Federal Awards. If the PAPPG and the award conditions are silent on a specific area covered by 2 CFR 200, the requirements specified in 2 CFR 200 must be followed. The PAPPG has been designed for use by both our customer community and NSF staff and consists of two parts Part I sets forth NSF s proposal preparation and submission guidelines. The coverage provides guidance for the preparation and submission of proposals to NSF. Some NSF programs have program solicitations that modify the general provisions of the PAPPG, and, in such cases, the guidelines provided in the solicitation must be followed. The policy and procedural guidance contained in the NSF Grants.gov Application Guide must be followed when preparing and submitting proposals to NSF via Grants.gov. Part II of the NSF PAPPG sets forth NSF policies and procedures regarding the award, administration, and monitoring of the Foundation s awards. Coverage includes the NSF award process, from issuance and administration of an NSF award through closeout. Guidance is provided regarding other award requirements or considerations that either are not universally applicable or do not follow the award cycle. Part II also implements other Public Laws, Executive Orders E.O. and other directives insofar as they apply to awards and is issued pursuant to the authority of Section 11 a of the NSF Act 42 USC 1870 . When NSF award general terms and conditions or an award notice reference a particular section of the PAPPG, then that section becomes part of the award requirements through incorporation by reference. The PAPPG does not apply to NSF contracts or other arrangements. For information relating to NSF contracts or other arrangements, consult the manuals and guidance maintained by the Division of Acquisition and Cooperative Support DACs . General information about NSF programs may be found on the NSF website. Additional information about special requirements of individual NSF programs may be obtained from the appropriate Foundation program office. Information about most program deadlines and target dates for proposals are available on the NSF website. Program deadline and target date information also appears in individual funding opportunities and on relevant NSF Division Office websites. Assistance Listings The System for Award Management SAM provides detailed, public descriptions of all Federal assistance listings. SAM replaces the Catalog of Federal Domestic Assistance CFDA , and all CFDA.gov functionality and data can now be found on SAM.gov. Each assistance listing, however, continues to be associated with a unique five digit CFDA number. NSF programs fall under the following listings on the SAM.gov site 47.041 Engineering 47.049 Mathematical and Physical Sciences 47.050 Geosciences 47.070 Computer and Information Science and Engineering 47.074 Biological Sciences 47.075 Social, Behavioral and Economic Sciences 47.076 Education and Human Resources 47.078 Polar Programs 2 See Chapter VI.C. for additional information on NSF award terms and conditions.  Proposal Award Policies Procedures Guide xi NSF 23 1 47.079 Office of International Science Engineering 47.083 Office of Integrative Activities 47.084 Technology, Innovation Partnerships Any questions or comments regarding the NSF PAPPG should be addressed to the Policy Office, Division of Institution Award Support, at policy nsf.gov.  Proposal Award Policies Procedures Guide xii NSF 23 1 C. Acronym List ABR Accomplishment Based Renewal ACH Automated Clearing House U.S. Treasury ACM Award Cash Management Service AD Assistant Director ADPE Automatic Data Processing Equipment APHIS Animal and Plant Health Inspection Service AOR Authorized Organizational Representative BAA Broad Agency Announcement BAAM Broad Agency Announcement Management System BFA Budget, Finance Award Management CA Cooperative Agreement CAFATC Cooperative Agreement Financial Administrative Terms and Conditions CAP Cost Analysis and Pre award Branch CAPTC Cooperative Agreement Programmatic Terms and Conditions CEQ Council on Environmental Quality CFR Code of Federal Regulations CGI Continuing Grant Increment CLB Career Life Balance CMIA Cash Management Improvement Act COA Collaborators and Other Affiliations COI Conflict of Interest co PI co Principal Investigator CSA Cooperative Support Agreement CSB Cooperative Support Branch DACS Division of Acquisition and Cooperative Support DAS Division of Administrative Services DCL Dear Colleague Letter DD Division Director DFM Division of Financial Management DGA Division of Grants and Agreements DHHS Department of Health and Human Services DIAS Division of Institution and Award Support DOC Department of Commerce DoED Department of Education DUNS Data Universal Numbering System DURC Dual Use Research of Concern EAGER EArly Concept Grants for Exploratory Research EFT Electronic Funds Transfer EEO Equal Employment Opportunity E.O. Executive Order F A Facilities Administrative Costs FAPIIS Federal Awardee Performance and Integrity Information System FAQs Frequently Asked Questions FAR Federal Acquisition Regulation FASED Facilitation Awards for Scientists and Engineers with Disabilities FDP Federal Demonstration Partnership FEMA Federal Emergency Management Agency FFRDC Federally Funded Research and Development Centers FIRS Federal Information Relay Service FOIA Freedom of Information Act FOP Federally owned Property FWA Federal Wide Assurance GC 1 Grant General Conditions GOALI Grant Opportunities for Academic Liaison with Industry GPO Government Publishing Office GSA General Services Administration IACUC Institutional Animal Care and Use Committee IBC Institutional Biosafety Committee IHE Institution of Higher Education IPA Intergovernmental Personnel Act IRB Institutional Review Board IRS Internal Revenue Service ISE International Science Engineering LEP Limited English Proficiency LFO Large Facilities Office LOI Letters of Intent MREFC Major Research Equipment and Facilities Construction Account NASEM National Academies of Sciences, Engineering and Medicine NDAA National Defense Authorization Act NEPA National Environmental Policy Act NIH National Institutes of Health NSB National Science Board NSF National Science Foundation OECR Office of Equity and Civil Rights OGC Office of the General Counsel OHRP Office for Human Research Protections OIA Office of Integrative Activities OIG Office of Inspector General OLAW Office for Laboratory Animal Welfare OMB Office of Management and Budget ONR Office of Naval Research PAPPG Proposal Award Policies Procedures Guide PHS Public Health Service PI Principal Investigator PNAG Prospective New Awardee Guide PO Program Officer POR Project Outcomes Report for the General Public ProSPCT Program Suitability and Proposal Concept Tool R D Research Development   Proposal Award Policies Procedures Guide xiii NSF 23 1 RAISE Research Advanced by Interdisciplinary Science and Engineering RAM Resolution and Advanced Monitoring Branch RAPID Rapid Response Research RECR Responsible and Ethical Conduct of Research REU Research Experiences for Undergraduates RIG Research Infrastructure Guide ROA Research Opportunity Awards RTC Research Terms and Conditions RUI Research in Undergraduate Institutions SAM System for Award Management SBA Small Business Administration SBIR Small Business Innovation Research SF Standard Form SPO Sponsored Projects Office SSN Social Security Number STEM Science, Technology, Engineering and Mathematics STTR Small Business Technology Transfer TDD Telephonic Device for the Deaf TIP Directorate for Technology, Innovation and Partnerships TTY Text Telephone UEI Unique Entity Identifier URL Uniform Resource Locator USC United States Code USDA U.S. Department of Agriculture VSEE Visiting Scientist, Engineer or Educator   Proposal Award Policies Procedures Guide xiv NSF 23 1 D. Definitions NSF Recipient Relationships 1. Definitions a. An award means an NSF grant or cooperative agreement. b. An Authorized Organizational Representative AOR Authorized Representative means the administrative official who, on behalf of the proposing organization is empowered to make certifications and representations and can commit the organization to the conduct of a project that NSF is being asked to support as well as adhere to various NSF policies and award requirements. c. A Grant Agreement means a legal instrument of financial assistance between NSF and a recipient that, consistent with 31 USC 6302, 6304 1 Is used to enter into a relationship the principal purpose of which is to transfer anything of value from NSF to the recipient to carry out a public purpose authorized by a law of the United States see 31 USC 6101 3 and not to acquire property or services for NSF s direct benefit or use 2 Is distinguished from a cooperative agreement in that it does not provide for substantial involvement between NSF and the recipient in carrying out the activity contemplated by the NSF award. NSF makes the following two types of grants a A Standard Grant means a type of grant in which NSF agrees to provide a specific level of support for a specified period of time with no statement of NSF intent to provide additional future support without submission of another proposal. b A Continuing Grant means a type of grant in which NSF agrees to provide a specific level of support for an initial specified period of time, usually a year, with a statement of intent to provide additional support for the project for additional periods, provided funds are available and the results achieved warrant further support. d. A Cost Reimbursement Award means a type of award under which NSF agrees to reimburse the recipient for work performed and or costs incurred by the recipient up to the total amount specified in the award. Such costs must be allowable in accordance with the applicable cost principles. Accountability is based primarily on technical progress, financial accounting, and fiscal reporting. Except under certain programs and under special circumstances, NSF awards are normally cost reimbursement type awards. e. A Fixed Amount Award means a type of award in which NSF provides a specific level of support without regard to actual costs incurred under the award. This type of NSF award reduces some of the administrative burden and recordkeeping requirements for both the recipient and NSF. Accountability is based primarily on performance and results. See 2 CFR 200.102 c , 200.201 b , and 200.333 for additional information. f. A Cooperative Agreement means a legal instrument of financial assistance between NSF and a recipient that, consistent with 31 USC 6302 6305 1 Is used to enter into a relationship the principal purpose of which is to transfer anything of value from NSF to the recipient to carry out a public purpose authorized by a law of the United States see 31 USC 6101 3 and not to acquire property or services for NSF s direct benefit or use 2 Is distinguished from a grant in that it provides for substantial involvement between NSF and the recipient in carrying out the activity contemplated by the NSF award.   Proposal Award Policies Procedures Guide xv NSF 23 1 In the case of NSF, grants and cooperative agreements involve the support or stimulation of scientific and engineering research, science and engineering education or other related activities. NSF is authorized to use grants and cooperative agreement for this purpose. Grants, however, are the primary mechanism of NSF support. g. Principal Investigator PI see PAPPG Exhibit II 3, Definitions of Categories of Personnel. For purposes of this document, when used throughout, the term Principal Investigator also includes Project Director and the term co Principal Investigator also include co Project Director. h. Recipient means an entity that receives an award directly from NSF. The term recipient does not include subrecipients or individuals that are beneficiaries of the award. NSF awards are normally made to organizations rather than to the PI and any co PIs identified on a proposal. Categories of eligible proposers may be found in Chapter I.E. 2. NSF Recipient Relationships a. Grants will be used by NSF when the accomplishment of the project objectives requires minimal NSF involvement during performance of the activities. Grants establish a relationship between NSF and the recipient in which 1 NSF agrees to provide up to a specified amount of financial support for the project to be performed under the conditions and requirements of the award. NSF will monitor progress and assure compliance with applicable standards. 2 The recipient agrees to perform the project as proposed the prudent management of the funds provided and carry out the supported activities in accordance with the provisions of the award. See Chapter VI.B for the documents that comprise an NSF award. b. Cooperative agreements will be used by NSF when the accomplishment of the project objectives requires substantial ongoing Foundation involvement during the project performance period. Substantial agency involvement may be necessary when an activity is technically and or managerially complex and would require extensive or close coordination between NSF and the recipient. This, however, does not affect NSF s right to unilaterally suspend or terminate support for cause or consider termination in accordance with Chapter XII, if it is in the best interest of NSF or the Government. The doctrine of substantial involvement is set forth in the Federal Grant and Cooperative Agreement Act of 1977 31 USC 6301 6308 . NSF utilizes two types of cooperative agreements Standalone Cooperative Agreement CA , which consists of a cooperative agreement for a single, unified award where there is no need to provide separate, discrete funding and oversight for the projects or programs under that award. Master Cooperative Agreement Cooperative Support Agreement CA CSA , which consists of a master or overall agreement having separate and specific awards CSAs that are funded individually under the umbrella of the master agreement. CSAs have their own terms and conditions in addition to those of the master agreement. The scope of CSAs falls within the scope of the master agreement, but each CSA has its own distinct award number and funding based on its approved budget no funding is attached to the master CA. Examples of projects suitable for cooperative agreements include management of research centers, large curriculum projects, multi user facilities, projects which involve complex subcontracting, construction or   Proposal Award Policies Procedures Guide xvi NSF 23 1 operations of major in house university facilities and major instrumentation development, and projects in which NSF participates with other stakeholder agencies or organizations that have influence over project direction and or development. Under a cooperative agreement, the recipient has primary responsibility for the conduct of the project. To the extent that NSF does not reserve responsibility for coordinating or integrating the project activities with other related activities or does not assume a degree of shared responsibility for certain aspects of the project, all such responsibilities remain with the recipient. While NSF will monitor the cooperative agreement in accordance with the terms and conditions of the award, the Foundation will not assume overall control of a project or unilaterally change or direct the project activities. The cooperative agreement will specify the extent to which NSF will advise, review, approve or otherwise be involved with project activities, as well as NSF s right to require more clearly defined deliverables. NSF may provide advice, guidance, or assistance of a technical, management, or coordinating nature and may require that the recipient obtain NSF prior approval of specific decisions, milestones, or project activities. Substantial involvement is incorporated in key areas of accountability in both financial and programmatic award terms examples include prior agency approval requirements, type and frequency of project plans, special reporting requirements, and project and recipient reviews that NSF will conduct during the term of the award. Cooperative agreements for construction are generally funded through a separate appropriation from Congress for Major Research Equipment and Facilities Construction MREFC . NSF maintains the MREFC appropriations in a separate budget account, for major construction projects that successfully undergo a rigorous selection process. MREFC funds cannot be co mingled with funds for activities other than construction therefore, NSF issues a separate award for operations and other activities related to commissioning and management of the facility or major instrument. The recipient is required to maintain an accounting system capable of segregating MREFC and operating costs, and to ensure that such costs are applied accordingly. Many major facility awards, including those for NSF supported Federally Funded Research and Development Centers FFRDCs , consist of a cooperative agreement as an umbrella award, establishing the overall basic provisions of the award, and separate cooperative support agreements. The cooperative support agreements contain specific terms and conditions for construction activities, management and operations, research activities that are co sponsored by other agencies, and any other focused activities that NSF needs to monitor separately from the overall objectives of the cooperative agreement.   Proposal Award Policies Procedures Guide xvii NSF 23 1 E. NSF Organizations The NSF organizations offices described below are normally of most direct interest to the NSF proposer and recipient community. Consult the NSF website at for the most current listing of NSF offices directorates and an organizational chart. 1. National Science Board NSB The NSB was established by Congress in 1950, and along with the Director, constitutes the National Science Foundation. The Board provides oversight for, and establishes the policies of, the agency within the framework of applicable national policies set forth by the President and Congress. In this capacity, the Board identifies issues that are critical to NSF s future, approves NSF s strategic budget directions, approves annual budget submissions to the Office of Management and Budget OMB , approves major awards and consults on certain programs, analyzes NSF s budget to ensure progress and consistency along the strategic direction set for NSF, and ensures balance between initiatives and core programs. In addition, the Board serves as an independent body of advisors to both the President and Congress on broad national policy issues and, together with the Director, recommends and encourages the pursuit of national policies related to science and engineering research and education. The Board is comprised of 24 members appointed by the President. The NSF Director also serves as an ex officio voting member of the Board. Members are selected on the basis of their distinguished service in science and engineering research and education, and are representative of scientific, engineering, and educational leadership throughout the Nation. 2. Program Divisions Offices Program Divisions Offices are responsible for the scientific, technical, and programmatic review and evaluation of proposals and for recommending that proposals be declined or awarded. The scientific, engineering and or educational aspects of an award will be monitored by the NSF Program Officer identified in the award notice. See Chapter III for a detailed description of the NSF Merit Review Process. Integral staff in the program division office relative to the NSF proposal and award process are a. NSF Program Officers. Program Officers are considered subject matter experts in both technical and programmatic areas. They conduct merit review of proposals and recommend which projects should be funded by the Foundation. b. NSF Division Directors. Division Directors are NSF executives whose responsibilities include long range planning, contributing to the achievement of the Foundation s strategic goals and objectives, and providing stewardship for budgetary and other resources. They are responsible for ensuring the integrity of the merit review and award process. 3. Division of Grants Agreements DGA DGA is responsible for the award and administration of the majority of NSF s assistance awards i.e., grants, cooperative agreements, and fellowship awards, recommended for support by NSF program offices. From pre award through closeout, DGA conducts a variety of business, financial, and administrative reviews to ensure compliance with award terms and conditions and consistency with applicable NSF policies and Federal rules and regulations. DGA provides stewardship and support to a diverse set of stakeholders including award recipients, NSF Directorates Offices, and others within the scientific research and education communities. DGA also maintains a leadership role in the Federal award arena.   Proposal Award Policies Procedures Guide xviii NSF 23 1 Grants Agreements Officers have delegated warrant authority to issue awards on behalf of the Foundation and their approval constitutes a legal obligation of Federal funds for recipients to expend to fulfill the scope of the approved proposal. In addition, Grants and Agreement Officers are responsible for issuing all award amendments and certain post award prior approvals, for monitoring recipient compliance with award terms and conditions, and for the administration and closeout of these awards. 4. Division of Institution Award Support DIAS DIAS is responsible for the development and implementation of proposal and award policies and procedures, clearance of NSF funding opportunities, advanced monitoring activities, cost analysis and award support, audit resolution, electronic award systems administration, and outreach to the external community. DIAS also advocates for the needs of the research community in NSF electronic research administration activities, including the transition to use of Research.gov. DIAS organizational units are as follows a. The Policy Office is responsible for the development, coordination, and issuance of NSF pre and post award policies for the assistance programs of NSF. The Policy Office provides guidance on the interpretation of NSF policies and procedures within NSF s electronic proposal and award systems, as well as official clearance for NSF funding opportunities. The Policy Office coordinates outreach programs for external stakeholders across the broad research community and NSF staff. Through a variety of mechanisms, it releases timely information regarding NSF policies and procedures, proposal preparation, and award management. In addition to working closely with professional research administration associations, the Policy Office coordinates two major grants conferences held at various locations throughout the U.S., typically in the spring and fall of each year. b. The Cost Analysis and Pre award CAP Branch specializes in determinations with regard to the allowability, allocability and reasonableness of costs either budgeted or claimed under NSF awards. CAP evaluates accounting systems, internal controls, and policies and procedures of prospective and current NSF recipients. Its major functions include pre award reviews of new recipients, Phase II research projects involving small businesses budgets of large scale awards and indirect cost rate negotiation. CAP provides guidance to recipients for questions related to its areas of responsibility. c. The Resolution and Advanced Monitoring RAM Branch specializes in determining the allowability, allocability and reasonableness of costs claimed under NSF awards. RAM also evaluates the accounting systems, internal controls and policies and procedures of current NSF recipients. RAM s primary responsibilities include audit resolution, advanced monitoring to assess recipients administrative capability, performance, and compliance with award terms and conditions and review of certain post award adjustments to expenditures. RAM provides guidance recipients for questions related to its areas of responsibility. d. The Systems Office plays a major role in the design, implementation, administration, and oversight of business rules for assistance awards across NSF electronic corporate systems. It is also responsible for systems analysis and requirements development necessary for the implementation of award business rules. 5. Division of Acquisition and Cooperative Support DACS DACS provides tailored acquisition, contracts, other arrangements and cooperative agreement award solutions and support for the Foundation. The Contracts Branch is responsible for planning, solicitation, negotiation, award, and administration of professional, research and development, and support contracts for NSF. The Cooperative Support Branch CSB is responsible for planning, solicitation, negotiation, award, and administration of cooperative agreements primarily focused on major facilities, including Federally Funded Research and Development Centers FFRDCs and multi organizational and international programs, in all lifecycle stages and certain Mid Scale Research Infrastructure Projects. CSB   Proposal Award Policies Procedures Guide xix NSF 23 1 participates in NSF s Integrated Project Teams, business process reviews, risk assessments, advanced cost analysis, oversight, and administrative assistance. The CSB Grants Agreements Officers have delegated warrant authority to issue awards on behalf of the Foundation and their approval constitutes a legal obligation of Federal funds for recipients to expend to fulfill the scope of the approved proposal. In addition, Grants Agreements Officers are responsible for issuing all award amendments and certain post award prior approvals, for monitoring recipient compliance with award terms and conditions, and for the administration and closeout of these awards. The DACS Policy Branch provides comprehensive compliance oversight and operational policies to support the DACS mission. 6. Division of Financial Management DFM DFM is responsible for the financial policy and financial management of NSF. The Division is responsible for recipient business office relationships and the payment of vendors. The Payments and Analytics Branch of DFM is available to assist recipient financial and business officials in matters of payment and financial reporting discussed in Chapter VIII of the PAPPG. 7. Large Facilities Office LFO LFO is the Foundation s primary resource for all oversight practices related to mid scale and major facility projects and is the NSF wide resource on project management best practices. LFO has the institutional authority and resources to effectively develop mandatory policies, practices and procedures, which are approved by senior management, for all stages of the facility life cycle. The Office provides 1 expert assistance on non scientific and non technical aspects of project planning, budgeting, and implementation for mid scale and major facilities 2 assurance that all applicable requirements are followed in order to give credence to NSF s oversight capabilities and 3 facilitates the use of best practices by fostering coordination and collaboration throughout NSF to share application of lessons learned from prior major facility projects. 8. Office of the General Counsel OGC OGC is the legal advisor and advocate for the Foundation, providing legal advice and counsel on all aspects of the Foundation s programs, policies, and operations, as well as areas affecting science and technology more broadly. Advice is provided in a wide variety of areas, such as assistance awards and contracts ethics and conflicts of interest Freedom of Information Act Privacy Act labor and personnel law environmental law Federal fiscal and administrative law and procedure and international law and agreements. 9. Office of Equity and Civil Rights OECR OECR is responsible for administering the Foundation s policies, practices and procedures related to external equal opportunity and civil rights. Its mission is to ensure the agency is in compliance with the laws and regulations that govern Federal sector Equal Employment Opportunity EEO and civil rights as well as, to foster a diverse and inclusive work environment that ensures equal opportunity through policy development, workforce analyses, outreach and education to best serve the Foundation s employees and its stakeholders. OECR also is responsible for responding to all civil rights matters pertaining to NSF programs or activities receiving Federal financial assistance, including Title IX Compliance activities. In addition, OECR serves as the Foundation s authority for receiving, processing, and coordinating the NSF response to all notifications required by the Foundation s Term and Condition entitled, Notification Requirements Regarding Sexual Harassment, Other Forms of Harassment, or Sexual Assault . See Chapter XI.A for additional information.   Proposal Award Policies Procedures Guide xx NSF 23 1 10. Office of Inspector General OIG OIG is an independent oversight office that reports directly to the NSB and Congress. It is responsible for conducting audits, reviews, and investigations of NSF programs, and of organizations and individuals that apply for or receive NSF funding. OIG also investigates allegations of research misconduct, such as plagiarism, falsification, or fabrication, involving researchers who request or receive NSF funding see Chapter XII.C.1 . The OIG staff includes scientists, attorneys, auditors, law enforcement personnel, evaluators, and information technology specialists. OIG audits focus on the assistance awards and contracts funded by NSF. Their purpose is to ensure that the financial, administrative, and program activities of NSF are conducted efficiently and effectively, and that the NSF recipient organization s claimed costs are allowable, reasonable, and properly allocated. OIG investigations focus on program integrity and financial or nonfinancial wrongdoing by organizations and individuals who submit proposals to, receive awards from, conduct business with, or work for NSF, and can result in criminal, civil, or administrative sanctions. Statutory law enforcement authority was granted to OIG by the U.S. Attorney General. Anyone, including recipients, administrators, and NSF personnel, should contact the OIG, as specified at to report instances of possible misconduct, fraud, waste, or abuse.  Proposal Award Policies Procedures Guide I 1 NSF 23 1 Part I Proposal Preparation and Submission Guidelines Part I sets forth NSF s proposal preparation and submission guidelines. The coverage provides guidance for the preparation and submission of proposals to NSF. Some NSF programs have program solicitations that modify the general provisions of the PAPPG, and, in such cases, the guidelines provided in the solicitation must be followed. Chapter I Pre Submission Information A. NSF Proposal Preparation and Submission Unless specified in an NSF program solicitation, proposals submitted to NSF must be submitted via use of Research.gov, Grants.gov, or the Broad Agency Announcement Management BAAM System. Further information on each system is provided below. Proposal Preparation and Submission via Research.gov. Research.gov may be used for proposal preparation, submission, proposal file updates, and budgetary revisions. The policy and procedural guidance contained in Part I of the PAPPG pertains to proposals submitted via Research.gov. Proposal Preparation and Submission in the NSF FastLane System is being decommissioned. During the transition, some parts of FastLane may be left open to support proposal review. Proposal file updates and budget revisions can be made for FastLane submitted proposals for a limited period. Proposal Preparation and Submission via Grants.gov. Grants.gov may be used for proposal preparation and submission. The policy and procedural guidance contained in the NSF Grants.gov Application Guide pertains specifically to proposals submitted via Grants.gov. Detailed information about Grants.gov is available from the Grants.gov website. Proposal Preparation and Submission via NSF s BAAM System. The BAAM system may be used for proposal preparation, submission, proposal file updates, and some select post award administrative activities. Detailed information about the BAAM System is available from the BAAM website. The policy and procedural guidance for submitting to NSF s BAAM System will be provided in the relevant solicitation or in the Broad Agency Announcement BAA . See also Section C. below for additional information . B. NSF Programs and Funding Opportunities The NSF website provides the most comprehensive source of information on NSF Directorates Offices including contact information , programs, and funding opportunities. See Section C below for more information on Categories of Funding Opportunities. Use of this website by potential proposers is strongly encouraged. In addition, NSF Update is an information delivery system designed to keep potential proposers and other interested parties apprised of new NSF funding opportunities and publications, important changes in proposal and award policies and procedures, and upcoming NSF Grants Conferences. Subscribers are informed each time new publications are issued that match their identified interests. C. Categories of Funding Opportunities NSF utilizes a variety of mechanisms to communicate opportunities for research and education support, as well as to generate proposals. A brief description of each category of funding opportunity follows.  Proposal Award Policies Procedures Guide I 2 NSF 23 1 1. Program Descriptions The term program description includes broad, general descriptions of programs and activities in NSF Directorates Offices and Divisions. Program descriptions are posted on Directorate Division websites to encourage the submission of proposals in specific program areas of interest to NSF. Program descriptions utilize the generic eligibility and proposal preparation instructions specified in Part I of the PAPPG, as well as the NSB approved merit review criteria. See Chapter III for additional information. 2. Program Announcements The term program announcement refers to formal NSF publications that announce NSF programs. Program announcements utilize the generic eligibility and proposal preparation guidelines specified in Part I of the PAPPG and incorporate the NSB approved merit review criteria. 3. Program Solicitations The term program solicitation refers to formal NSF publications that encourage the submission of proposals in specific program areas of interest to NSF. They generally are more focused than program announcements, and normally apply for a limited period of time. Competition among proposals is more precisely defined than with program announcements, and proposals received compete directly with each other for NSF funding. Program solicitations are issued when the funding opportunity has one or more of the following features provides supplemental proposal preparation guidance or deviates from the guidelines established in Part I of the PAPPG contains additional review criteria relevant to the program requires submission of a letter of intent see Chapter I.D.2 or preliminary proposal see Chapter I.D.3 deviates from or restricts the standard categories of proposers specified in Section E. below limits the number of proposals that may be submitted by an organization and or Principal Investigator PI or co Principal Investigator co PI 4 requires cost sharing requires a limitation in indirect Facilities Administrative F A costs specifies additional award conditions and or reporting requirements and or anticipates use of a cooperative agreement. 4. Broad Agency Announcements BAAs The term Broad Agency Announcement refers to a type of funding opportunity used by NSF for basic and applied research, scientific study, and experimentation. Unless otherwise specified, NSF can choose to fund proposals submitted in response to a BAA as grants, cooperative agreements, contracts, or other arrangements. BAAs are broad in their subject matter and focus on advancing science rather than acquiring specific products. See Federal Acquisition Regulation Part 35.016 for additional information. 4Unless otherwise specified, the term organization refers to all categories of proposers.  Proposal Award Policies Procedures Guide I 3 NSF 23 1 5. Dear Colleague Letters DCLs DCLs are intended to provide general information to the community, clarify or amend an existing policy or document, or inform the NSF proposer community about upcoming opportunities or special competitions for supplements to existing awards. They also may be used to announce NSF s interest in receiving proposals in specified topical areas for the following proposal types contained in Chapter II.E Planning, Rapid Response Research RAPID Early concept Grants for Exploratory Research EAGER Research Advanced by Interdisciplinary Science and Engineering RAISE and Conference. D. Types of Submissions 1. Concept Outlines Some NSF proposal types see Chapter II.E for additional information or funding opportunities may require submission of a concept outline prior to submission of a full proposal. A concept outline is a concise summary of a project idea that contains information about the prospective PI s , potentially germane NSF organizational unit s , project title, keywords, and brief narrative descriptions of the idea and fit to any special criteria required for the proposal type or funding opportunity. The primary purposes of requiring a concept outline are to ensure that the concept being proposed by the prospective PI is appropriate for the proposal type funding opportunity, and to help reduce the administrative burden associated with submission of a full proposal. Concept outlines are considered by cognizant NSF program officers to determine the appropriateness of the work to the proposal type funding opportunity. The prospective PI will receive an email that specifies whether a full proposal may be submitted. Full proposals submitted without the requisite Program Officer Concurrence Email for proposal types funding opportunities requiring a concept outline will be returned without review or not accepted. See Chapter II.E for additional information. Concept outlines also may be submitted at any time by prospective PIs seeking early feedback on the general appropriateness and potentially relevant funding opportunities for a project idea prior to developing a full proposal. Concept outlines are submitted either by email to a designated address or via the Program Suitability and Proposal Concept Tool ProSPCT . An NSF funding opportunity that requires a concept outline will provide directions on use of email or ProSPCT and specific guidance on email formatting or the completion of the webform to facilitate consistent identification and consideration of the respective concept outlines. ProSPCT consists of a dashboard and webform for prospective PIs to prepare, send, and track the status of their concept outline submissions. The ProSPCT webform uses drop down selections, validations, and text entry fields with character count limits to ensure users have provided the minimal complete information and met consistent formatting requirements based on the selected proposal type prior to submitting the concept outline. ProSPCT users must have a valid Login.gov account to access the tool. 2. Letters of Intent LOI Some NSF program solicitations require or request submission of an LOI in advance of submission of a full proposal. An LOI is not a binding document. The predominant reason for its use is to help NSF program staff gauge the size and range of the competition, enabling earlier selection and better management of reviewers and panelists. In addition, the information contained in an LOI is used to help avoid potential conflicts of interest in the review process. An LOI normally contains the PI s names, a proposed title, a list of possible participating organizations if applicable , and a synopsis of one page that describes the work in sufficient detail to permit an appropriate selection of reviewers.  Proposal Award Policies Procedures Guide I 4 NSF 23 1 Proposers that plan to submit a collaborative proposal from multiple organizations must submit a single LOI for the entire project, given that NSF considers a collaborative proposal to be a unified research project. An LOI is not externally evaluated or used to decide on funding. The requirement to submit an LOI will be identified in the program solicitation, and such letters are submitted electronically to NSF. Failure to submit a required LOI identified in a program solicitation will result in a full proposal not being accepted or returned without review. 3. Preliminary Proposals Some NSF program solicitations require or request submission of a preliminary proposal in advance of submission of a full proposal. The three predominant reasons for requiring submission of a preliminary proposal are to reduce the proposers unnecessary effort in proposal preparation when the chance of success is very small. This is particularly true of exploratory initiatives when the community senses that a major new direction is being identified, or competitions that will result in a small number of awards increase the overall quality of the full submission and assist NSF program staff in managing the review process and in the selection of reviewers. The NSF program solicitation will specify content and submission requirements when preliminary proposals are to be used. Preliminary proposals are prepared by the PI using the Proposal Preparation Module in Research.gov. On the Cover Sheet, the PI clicks on the Preliminary Proposal check box. The PI completes only the sections appropriate to the preliminary proposal. The PI then forwards the proposal to the appropriate office at the proposing organization, and the Authorized Organizational Representative AOR signs and submits the preliminary proposal via use of NSF s electronic systems. One of the following two types of decisions may be received from NSF upon submission of a preliminary proposal. The program solicitation will specify the type of decision to be rendered for a particular program. a. Invite Not Invite Decisions This type of mechanism is used when the NSF decision made on the preliminary proposal is final, affecting the organization s eligibility to submit a full proposal. Only submitters of favorably reviewed preliminary proposals are invited and eligible to submit full proposals. The PI and the organization s Sponsored Projects Office SPO or equivalent will be electronically notified of NSF s decision to either invite submission of a full proposal or decline NSF support. b. Encourage Discourage Decisions This type of mechanism is used when the NSF decision made on the preliminary proposal is advisory only. This means that submitters of both favorably and unfavorably reviewed preliminary proposals are eligible to submit full proposals. The PI and the organization s SPO will be notified of NSF s decision to either encourage or discourage submission of a full proposal. 4. Full Proposals The full proposal should present the 1 objectives and scientific, engineering, or educational significance of the proposed work 2 suitability of the methods to be employed 3 qualifications of the investigator and the recipient organization 4 effect of the activity on the infrastructure of science, engineering, and education, if applicable and 5 amount of funding required. It should present the intellectual merit and broader impacts of the proposed project clearly and should be prepared with the care and thoroughness of a paper submitted for publication. The requisite proposal preparation instructions are contained in Chapter  Proposal Award Policies Procedures Guide I 5 NSF 23 1 II. Sufficient information should be provided to enable reviewers to evaluate the proposal in accordance with the two merit review criteria established by the NSB. See Chapter III for additional information on NSF processing and review of proposals. NSF expects strict adherence to the rules of proper scholarship and attribution. The responsibility for proper scholarship and attribution rests with the authors of a proposal all parts of the proposal should be prepared with equal care for this concern. Authors other than the PI or any co PI must be named and acknowledged. Serious failure to adhere to such standards can result in findings of research misconduct. Research misconduct refers to fabrication, falsification, or plagiarism in proposing or performing research funded by NSF, reviewing research proposals submitted to NSF, or in reporting research results funded by NSF. Reporting results include but is not limited to annual final project reports and Project Outcomes Reports submitted to NSF, as well as the publication of results from the NSF funded projects. NSF policies and rules on research misconduct are discussed in the Chapter XII.C, as well as 45 CFR Part 689. NSF will not tolerate research misconduct. Allegations of research misconduct are taken seriously and are investigated by NSF s Office of Inspector General OIG . OIG refers completed investigations of research misconduct to NSF for action. Upon findings of research misconduct, NSF will take appropriate action against individuals or organizations. The Metric Conversion Act of 1975, as amended, and E.O. 12770 of 1991 encourage Federal agencies to use the Metric System SI in procurement, award and other business related activities. Proposers are encouraged to use the Metric System of weights and measures in proposals submitted to the Foundation. Recipients also are encouraged to use metric units in reports, publications and correspondence relating to proposals and awards. E. Who May Submit Proposals NSF welcomes proposals on behalf of all qualified scientists, engineers, and educators. The Foundation strongly encourages women, minorities, and persons with disabilities to participate fully in its programs. In accordance with Federal statutes, regulations and NSF policies, no person on grounds of race, color, age, sex, national origin, or disability shall be excluded from participation in, be denied the benefits of, or be subjected to discrimination under, any program or activity receiving financial assistance from NSF, although some programs may have special requirements that limit eligibility. Scientists, engineers, and educators usually initiate proposals that are officially submitted by their employing organization. Before formal submission, the proposal may be discussed with appropriate NSF program staff. Graduate students are not encouraged to submit research proposals but should arrange to serve as research assistants to faculty members. Some NSF divisions accept proposals for Doctoral Dissertation Research Grants when submitted by a faculty member on behalf of the graduate student. Categories of Proposers The following describes the eligibility of specific categories of proposers. A program solicitation, however, may apply more restrictive eligibility criteria. 1. The following organizations in the following categories are eligible to submit proposals a Institutions of Higher Education IHEs Two and four year IHEs including community colleges accredited in, and having a campus located in the U.S., acting on behalf of their faculty members. IHEs located outside the U.S. fall under paragraph 6. below. Special Instructions for International Branch Campuses of U.S. IHEs If the proposal includes funding to be provided to an international branch campus of a U.S. IHE including through use of subawards and consultant arrangements , the proposer must explain the benefit s to the project of performance at the international branch campus and justify why the project activities cannot be  Proposal Award Policies Procedures Guide I 6 NSF 23 1 performed at the U.S. campus. Such information must be included in the project description. The box for Funding of an International Branch Campus of a U.S. IHE must be checked on the Cover Sheet if the proposal includes funding for an international branch campus of a U.S. IHE. b Non profit, Non academic Organizations Independent museums, observatories, research laboratories, professional societies, and similar organizations located in the U.S. that are directly associated with educational or research activities. c Tribal Governments The term tribal government means the governing body of any Indian or Alaska Native tribe, band, nation, pueblo, village, or community that the Secretary of the Interior acknowledges to exist as an Indian tribe under the Federally Recognized Indian Tribe List Act of 1994 25 U.S.C. 479a, et seq. 2. The following organizations may be eligible to submit proposals a For profit Organizations U.S. based commercial organizations, including small businesses, with strong capabilities in scientific or engineering research or education and a passion for innovation. An unsolicited proposal from a for profit organization may be funded when the project is of special concern from a national point of view, special resources are available for the work, or the proposed project is especially meritorious. NSF is interested in supporting projects that couple industrial use inspired challenges and research resources with those of IHEs therefore, the Foundation especially welcomes proposals for cooperative projects involving both IHEs and industry. Specific NSF funding opportunities also may make For Profit Organizations eligible for submission of proposals to the Foundation. US based affiliates or subsidiaries of foreign organizations must contact the cognizant NSF program officer prior to preparing and submitting a proposal to NSF. b State and Local Governments As programmatically necessary and as provided for in a solicitation or BAA, State, and local governments may be eligible to submit proposals. c Foreign Organizations NSF rarely provides direct funding support to foreign organizations. NSF will consider proposals for cooperative projects involving U.S. and foreign organizations, provided support is requested only for the U.S. portion of the collaborative effort. In cases however, where the proposer considers the foreign organization or foreign individual s involvement to be essential to the project and proposes to provide funding through the NSF budget through a subaward or consultant arrangement , the proposer must explain why support from the foreign counterpart s in country resources is not feasible and why the foreign organization or foreign individual can carry out the activity more effectively than a U.S. organization or U.S. individual. In addition, the proposed activity must demonstrate how one or more of the following conditions have been met The foreign organization or foreign individual contributes unique expertise, organizational capability, facilities, data resources, and or access to a geographic location not generally available to U.S. investigators or which would require significant effort or time to duplicate and or The foreign organization or foreign individual offers significant science and engineering education, training, or research opportunities to the U.S. Such information must be included in any proposal to NSF, including new and renewal proposals. The information must be included in the project description section of the proposal. The box for Funding of a Foreign Organization or Foreign Individual must be checked on the Cover Sheet if the proposal includes funding for a foreign organization or foreign individual.  Proposal Award Policies Procedures Guide I 7 NSF 23 1 d Other Federal Agencies NSF does not normally support research or education activities by scientists, engineers or educators employed by Federal agencies or FFRDCs. Under unusual circumstances, other Federal agencies and FFRDCs may submit proposals directly to NSF. A proposed project is only eligible for support if it meets one or more of the following exceptions, as determined by a cognizant NSF Program Officer in advance of proposal submission Special Projects. Under exceptional circumstances, research, or education projects at other Federal agencies or FFRDCs that can make unique contributions to the needs of researchers elsewhere or to other specific NSF objectives may receive NSF support. National and International Programs. The Foundation may fund research and logistical support activities of other Government agencies or FFRDCs directed at meeting the goals of special national and international research programs for which the Foundation bears special responsibility, such as the U.S. Antarctic Research Program. International Travel Awards. To help ensure appropriate representation or availability of a particular expertise at an international conference, staff researchers of other Federal agencies may receive NSF international travel awards. Proposers who think their project may meet one of the exceptions listed above must contact a cognizant NSF Program Officer before preparing a proposal for submission. In addition, a scientist, engineer or educator who has a joint appointment with an IHE and a Federal agency such as a Veterans Administration Hospital, or with an IHE and a FFRDC may submit proposals through the IHE and may receive support if the individual is a faculty member or equivalent of the IHE, although part of the individual s salary may be provided by the Federal agency. Preliminary inquiry must be made to the appropriate program before preparing a proposal for submission. 3. Unaffiliated individuals Unaffiliated individuals in the U.S. and unaffiliated U.S. citizens are not eligible to receive direct funding support from NSF. Recipients of Federal funds must be able to demonstrate their ability to fully comply with the requirements specified in 2 CFR 200, Uniform Administrative Requirements, Cost Principles, and Audit Requirements for Federal Awards. As such, unaffiliated individuals are strongly encouraged to affiliate with an organization that is able to meet the requirements specified in 2 CFR 200. An individual submitting a proposal to an NSF Postdoctoral Fellowship solicitation is not considered an unaffiliated individual. F. When to Submit Proposals Proposers should allow adequate time for processing of proposals see Chapter I.H for further information . Many NSF programs accept proposals at any time. Other programs, however, establish due dates for submission of proposals. The following types of due dates are utilized by NSF 1. Target Dates dates after which proposals will still be accepted, although they may miss a particular panel or committee meeting. 2. Deadline Dates dates after which proposals will not be accepted or will be returned without review by NSF. The deadline date will be waived only in extenuating circumstances. Such a deviation may be authorized only in accordance with Chapter II.A. 3. Submission Windows designated periods of time during which proposals will be accepted for review by NSF. It is NSF s policy that the end date of a submission window converts to, and is subject to, the same policies as a deadline date.  Proposal Award Policies Procedures Guide I 8 NSF 23 1 These target dates, deadlines, and submission windows are published in specific program descriptions, program announcements and solicitations that can be obtained through the NSF website.5 Unless otherwise stated in a program announcement or solicitation, proposals must be received by the specified date. If the deadline date falls on a weekend, it will be extended to the following Monday if the date falls on a Federal holiday, it will be extended to the following business day. Proposals must be received by 5 p.m. submitter s local time on the established deadline date. Failure to submit by 5.p.m. submitter s local time will result in the proposal not being accepted. See Chapter IV.B for additional information. Letters of intent or preliminary proposals also follow the 5 p.m. submitter s local time standard. Special Exceptions to NSF s Deadline Date Policy In the occurrence of a natural or anthropogenic event, or when NSF is closed due to inclement weather or other reason that interferes with an organization s ability to meet a proposal submission deadline, NSF has developed the following guidelines for use by impacted organizations. Natural or Anthropogenic Event Flexibility in meeting announced deadline dates because of a natural or anthropogenic event that impacts a proposer s ability to submit a proposal to NSF may be granted with the approval of the cognizant NSF Program Officer. Where possible, such requests should be submitted in advance of the proposal deadline. Proposers should contact the cognizant NSF Program Officer in the Division Office to which they intend to submit their proposal and request authorization to submit a proposal after the deadline date. Proposers must then follow the written or verbal guidance provided by the cognizant NSF Program Officer. The Foundation will work with each impacted organization on a case by case basis to address its specific issue s . Generally, NSF permits extension of the deadline by up to five business days. To submit the proposal after the deadline date, proposers must check the Special Exception to the Deadline Date Policy box on the NSF Cover Sheet, indicating NSF approval has been obtained. A statement identifying the nature of the event that impacted the ability to submit the proposal on time must be uploaded under Nature of Natural or Anthropogenic Event in the Single Copy Document section in Research.gov. If available, written approval from the cognizant NSF Program Officer also should be uploaded under the Additional Single Copy Documents in the Single Copy Document section in Research.gov. Closure of NSF When NSF is closed due to inclement weather or other reason6, deadline s that occurred during the closure automatically will be extended to the following business day after the closure ends. G. How to Submit Proposals 1. Submission Instructions The same work proposal cannot be funded twice. If the proposer envisions review by multiple programs, more than one program may be designated on the Cover Sheet. The submission of duplicate or substantially similar proposals concurrently for review by more than one program will result in the return of the redundant proposals. See Chapter IV.B. In submission of a proposal for funding, the AOR is required to provide certain NSF specific proposal certifications. See Chapter II.C.1.d for a listing. This certification process will occur concurrently with submission of the proposal. Submission of government wide representations and certifications is addressed in Chapter I.G.2 below. 5A listing of upcoming target dates and deadlines, sorted by date and by program area is available on the NSF website. 6 This policy is not intended to cover NSF closures due to lapses in appropriation. In such cases, specific guidance will be issued, as appropriate.  Proposal Award Policies Procedures Guide I 9 NSF 23 1 2. Requirements Relating to Unique Entity Identifier UEI and Registration in the System for Award Management SAM All proposers must provide a UEI when applying for a new or renewal award. NSF requires that organizations registering to use NSF s electronic systems have a valid and active SAM registration and have a valid UEI. NSF will validate that each proposer s UEI and SAM registration are active and valid prior to allowing submission of a proposal to NSF. If a registration is not active, an organization will not be able to submit a proposal. Additionally, if the registration is not revalidated annually and is not valid, NSF will block any award approval actions. Organizations are responsible for maintaining their SAM registration and UEI information. Any subrecipients named in the proposal also are required to obtain a UEI and register in Research.gov. Subrecipients named in the proposal, however, do not need to be registered in SAM. GSA has implemented a process by which an organization that will only be a subrecipient may receive a UEI without undergoing a complete SAM registration. See the SAM.gov website for additional information about registration and UEI assignment. SAM is the primary registrant database for the U.S. Government. SAM collects, validates, stores, and disseminates data in support of agency acquisition missions, including Federal agency contract and Federal financial assistance awards. This SAM registration must be maintained with current information at all times during which an organization has an active award or a proposal under consideration by NSF. Failure to comply with SAM registration requirement prior to proposal submission may impact the processing of the proposal. Proposers are advised that entity registration will become active after three to five business days when the Internal Revenue Service IRS validates the Tax ID Number. Organizations are responsible for maintaining the accuracy of their information in SAM and utilizing SAM to submit government wide representations and certifications. Prior to proposal submission, all proposing organizations are required to have reviewed and certified compliance with the government wide financial assistance representations and certifications maintained in SAM. Failure to comply with SAM certification and registration requirements will impact the submission and processing of the proposal. If a registration is not active, an organization will not be able to submit a proposal, nor will NSF be able to take approval actions on any submitted proposals or recommended awards. Additionally, payments will not be able to be processed and approved. Organizations also are responsible for updating all SAM registration information as it changes. Once an award is made, failure to maintain current and complete information within SAM will impact receipt of funding. To maintain an active status in SAM, an organization s registration must be renewed and revalidated at least every 12 months from the date of the previous registration, including recertification of the government wide financial assistance representations and certifications. If the registration is not renewed, it will expire. An expired registration will impact an organization s ability to submit proposals and or receive award payments. Note that if an organization s registration lapses, it will take longer to reactivate the registration than if the registration is still active when doing the revalidation and recertification. SAM is the NSF system of record for organizational information, including financial and address information. The Legal Business Name and Physical Address information are automatically pulled from SAM and used by NSF to validate organizational information. All name and address changes must be handled via SAM. NSF has no control over SAM and cannot override SAM data or statuses. 3. NSF ID The NSF ID is a unique numerical identifier assigned to users by NSF. The NSF ID is used throughout NSF s electronic systems as a login ID and identification verification. Each individual user of NSF systems, e.g., Research.gov should not have more than one NSF ID. Users with more than one NSF ID should contact the Help Desk at 1 800 381 1532 or by e mail to rgov nsf.gov for assistance.  Proposal Award Policies Procedures Guide I 10 NSF 23 1 Submission of Social Security Numbers SSNs only will be requested where it is necessary for business purposes, e.g., financial reimbursement. An SSN is solicited under the NSF Act of 1950, as amended. 4. Proposal Receipt Once the proposal is submitted, PIs can check the status of the proposal via use of NSF s electronic systems. If a proposal number is not reflected in the electronic systems, contact the Help Desk at 1 800 381 1532 or by e mail to rgov nsf.gov. Communications about the proposal should be addressed to the cognizant NSF Program Officer with reference to the proposal number. Proposers are strongly encouraged to use NSF s electronic systems to verify the status of their submission to NSF. H. Proposal Processing Proposers should allow up to six months for programmatic review and processing see Chapter III for additional information on the NSF merit review process . In addition, proposers should be aware that the NSF Division of Grants and Agreements generally makes awards within 30 calendar days after the program division office makes its recommendation. Grants and cooperative agreements that are being made to organizations that have not received an NSF award within the preceding five years or involving special situations such as coordination with another Federal agency or a private funding source , cooperative agreements, and other unusual arrangements may require additional review and processing time. Proposals that are time sensitive e.g., conference and group travel will be accepted for review only if, in the opinion of the cognizant Program Officer, they are received in sufficient time to permit appropriate NSF review and processing to support an award in advance of the activity to be supported. Every effort is made to reach a decision and inform the proposer promptly. Until an award is made, NSF is not responsible for any costs incurred by the proposing organization.  Proposal Award Policies Procedures Guide II 1 NSF 23 1 Chapter II Proposal Preparation Instructions Each proposing organization that is new to NSF or has not had an active NSF assistance award within the previous five years should be prepared to submit basic organization and management information and certifications, when requested, to the applicable award making division within the Office of Budget, Finance Award Management BFA . The requisite information is described in the NSF Prospective New Awardee Guide. The information contained in this Guide will assist the organization in preparing documents which NSF requires to conduct administrative and financial reviews of the organization. This Guide also serves as a means of highlighting the accountability requirements associated with Federal awards. Proposers should be aware of core strategies that are essential to the fulfillment of NSF s mission, as articulated in Building the Future Investing in Discovery and Innovation NSF Strategic Plan for Fiscal Years FY 2018 2022. These strategies are integrated in the program planning and implementation process, of which proposal review is one part. NSF s mission is particularly well implemented through the integration of research and education and broadening participation in NSF programs, projects, and activities. One of the strategic objectives in support of NSF s mission is to foster integration of research and education through the programs, projects, and activities it supports at NSF recipient organizations. These organizations recruit, train, and prepare a diverse science, technology, engineering, and mathematics STEM workforce to advance the frontiers of science and participate in the U.S. technology based economy. NSF s contribution to the national innovation ecosystem is to provide cutting edge research under the guidance of the Nation s most creative scientists and engineers. NSF also supports development of a strong STEM workforce by investing in building the knowledge that informs improvements in STEM teaching and learning. NSF will not tolerate research misconduct in proposing or performing research funded by NSF, reviewing research proposals submitted to NSF, or in reporting research results funded by NSF. For additional information, see Chapters I.D.3., IX.B., and XII.C. NSF s mission calls for the broadening of opportunities and expanding participation of groups, organizations, and geographic regions that are underrepresented in STEM disciplines, which is essential to the health and vitality of science and engineering. NSF is committed to this principle of diversity and deems it central to the programs, projects, and activities it considers and supports. A. Conformance with Instructions for Proposal Preparation 1. Deviations from NSF Proposal Preparation and Submission Requirements Unless specified in a program solicitation, all proposals must comply with the proposal preparation instructions contained in Part I of the PAPPG or the NSF Grants.gov Application Guide. Conformance will be strictly enforced unless a written deviation authorization is received in advance of proposal submission from the cognizant NSF Assistant Director Office Head or designee. Such deviation authorizations must be uploaded as a single copy document and include the name, date, and title of the NSF official, and the nature of the deviation authorized. See section C.1 below for additional information. Except as noted above, NSF will not accept or will return without review proposals that are not consistent with these instructions. See Chapter IV.B for additional information. 2. Requests for Reasonable and Accessibility Accommodations NSF is dedicated to fostering and maintaining a diverse and inclusive digital environment that eliminates barriers and ensures our programs, systems, and services are accessible to everyone as required by Section 508 of the Rehabilitation Act, as amended in 2017. Individuals with disabilities who need reasonable  Proposal Award Policies Procedures Guide II 2 NSF 23 1 accommodations as part of the proposal process must contact the Office of Equity and Civil Rights OECR Disability Program Manager DPM at rarequest nsf.gov at least 30 calendar days prior to the proposal deadline date. Individuals with disabilities who need accessibility accommodations to access NSF proposal submission and award management systems, websites and other digital content must contact the NSF Section 508 Compliance Officer at least 30 calendar days prior to the proposal deadline date. For reasonable accommodation requests, NSF may request medical documentation signed and dated by the proposer s physician that describes a the nature, severity, and duration of the impairment b the activities the impairment limits and c why and how the particular reasonable accommodation requested will assist the proposer. The information provided in support of a reasonable accommodation request is confidential and available only to designated agency staff that are responsible for providing and or coordinating accommodation services. Decisions on reasonable accommodations are made by the DPM, in concert with applicable agency officials and based on the information provided. It is important to note that the desired request may not always be the accommodation that is ultimately provided. NSF is not required to provide accommodations that impose an undue hardship on the operation of the organization or that fundamentally alter the nature of its programs or activities. Requests for reasonable or accessibility accommodations may not include personal use items or extensions to proposal deadline dates. All proposals must be received by the deadline date specified in the NSF funding opportunity. B. NSF Disclosure Requirements As part of the proposal preparation and submission process, all senior personnel identified on a proposal are required to submit information to assist reviewers and program staff in making informed recommendations and funding decisions. These disclosures are provided in the following proposal sections Biographical Sketch see Chapter II,D.h i Current and Pending Support see Chapter II.D.h ii and Collaborators and Other Affiliations see Chapter II.D.h iii . It is vital that submission of such disclosure information be taken seriously. The Biographical Sketch and Current and Pending Support documents require the individual to certify that the information provided is accurate, current, and complete. Violation of disclosure requirements may lead to criminal, civil, and or administrative consequences as may be deemed appropriate based upon the particular facts of the violation. Violations will be thoroughly investigated by the NSF OIG and referred to criminal and or civil offices within the Department of Justice, when warranted. Depending on the facts surrounding the violation, and consistent with due process requirements, NSF may consider a range of actions. Such actions include, but are not limited to non acceptance of a proposal submitted to NSF ensuring that individual s who violate these requirements are not permitted to perform work under an NSF award ineligibility for participation as an NSF reviewer suspension or termination of an award and or placement of the individual or research organization in SAM or the Federal Awardee Performance and Integrity Information System FAPIIS to alert other agencies. NSF will require senior personnel on potential awards to submit updated Current and Pending Support information prior to award, as well as part of the annual and final reporting process, when applicable. NSF may consider the following factors, where relevant and consistent with applicable laws and regulations, in determining the appropriate consequences for violations of disclosure requirements  Proposal Award Policies Procedures Guide II 3 NSF 23 1 harm or potential harm to NSF, the Federal Government, U.S. taxpayers, and other national interests intent of the offender the offender s knowledge of requirements pattern of violation versus isolated incident existence and timing of self disclosure policies, procedures, and training available to the offender and any other mitigating factors. C. Format of the Proposal Prior to submission, it is strongly recommended that proposers conduct an administrative review to ensure that proposals comply with the guidelines established in Part I of the PAPPG or the NSF Grants.gov Application Guide. The Proposal Preparation Checklist Exhibit II 1 may be used to assist in this review. The checklist is not intended to be an all inclusive repetition of the required proposal contents and associated proposal preparation guidelines. It is, however, meant to highlight certain critical items so they will not be overlooked when the proposal is prepared. During completion of the proposal setup wizard in Research.gov, the PI will be prompted to select the applicable response that describes the nature and type of proposal being developed Research see Chapter II, Sections A through D Planning Proposal see Chapter II.F.1 Rapid Response Research RAPID see Chapter II.F.2 Early concept Grants for Exploratory Research EAGER see Chapter II.F.3 Research Advanced by Interdisciplinary Science and Engineering RAISE see Chapter II.F.4 Grant Opportunities for Academic Liaison with Industry GOALI see Chapter II.F.5 Ideas Lab see Chapter II.F.6 Facilitation Awards for Scientists and Engineers with Disabilities FASED see Chapter II.F.7 Career Life Balance CLB Supplemental Funding Requests see Chapter II.F.8 Conference see Chapter II.F.9 Equipment see Chapter II.F.10 Travel see Chapter II.F.11 Center see relevant funding opportunity and Chapter II.F.12 Research Infrastructure see relevant funding opportunity and Chapter II.F.13 or Fellowship see relevant funding opportunity . Whether the proposal is A collaborative proposal from one organization see Chapter II.E.3.a A collaborative proposal from multiple organizations see Chapter II.E.3.b or Not a collaborative proposal. The requested proposal information noted above will be used to determine the applicable proposal preparation requirements that must be followed. Proposers are strongly advised to review the applicable sections of Part I of the PAPPG pertinent to the type of proposal being developed prior to submission. All proposals are checked for compliance with applicable requirements prior to submission in Research.gov. Additional information on NSF auto compliance checks is available on the NSF website.  Proposal Award Policies Procedures Guide II 4 NSF 23 1 1. Proposal Pagination Instructions For proposals submitted via Research.gov, the system will automatically paginate a proposal. Each section of the proposal that is uploaded as a file should leave out page numbering unless otherwise directed within Research.gov. 2. Proposal Font, Spacing, and Margin Requirements The proposal must conform to the following requirements a. Use one of the following fonts identified below Arial6 not Arial Narrow , Courier New, or Palatino Linotype at a font size of 10 points or larger Times New Roman at a font size of 11 points or larger or Computer Modern family of fonts at a font size of 11 points or larger. A font size of less than 10 points may be used for mathematical formulas or equations, figures, tables, or diagram captions and when using a Symbol font to insert Greek letters or special characters. Other fonts not specified above, such as Cambria Math, may be used for mathematical formulas, equations, or when inserting Greek letters or special characters. PIs are cautioned, however, that the text must still be readable. b. No more than six lines of text within a vertical space of one inch. c. Margins, in all directions, must be at least an inch. No proposer supplied information may appear in the margins. d. Paper size must be no larger than standard letter paper size 8  by 11 . These requirements apply to all uploaded sections of a proposal, including supplementary documentation. 3. Page Formatting Proposers are strongly encouraged to use only a standard, single column format for the text. The guidelines specified above establish the minimum font size requirements however, PIs are advised that readability is of paramount importance and should take precedence in selection of an appropriate font for use in the proposal. Use of a small font size makes it difficult for reviewers to read the proposal consequently, the use of small fonts not in compliance with the above guidelines may be grounds for NSF to return the proposal without review. Adherence to font size and line spacing requirements also is necessary to ensure that no proposer will have an unfair advantage, by using smaller font or line spacing to provide more text in the proposal. D. Proposal Contents 1. Single Copy Documents Certain categories of information that are submitted in conjunction with a proposal are for NSF Use Only. As such, the information is not provided to reviewers for use in the review of the proposal. With the exception of NSF specific proposal certifications, these documents should be submitted in Research.gov. A summary of each of these categories follows 6 Macintosh users also may use Helvetica and Palatino fonts.  Proposal Award Policies Procedures Guide II 5 NSF 23 1 a. Authorization to Deviate from NSF Proposal Preparation Requirements if applicable Instructions for obtaining authorization to deviate from NSF proposal preparation instructions are provided in Chapter II.A. b. List of Suggested Reviewers or Reviewers Not to Include optional Proposers may include a list of suggested reviewers including email address and organizational affiliation who they believe are especially well qualified to review the proposal. Proposers also may designate persons they would prefer not to review the proposal. These suggestions are optional. Exhibit II 2 contains information on conflicts of interest that may be useful in preparation of this list. The cognizant Program Officer handling the proposal considers the suggestions and may contact the proposer for further information. The decision regarding whether to use these suggestions, however, remains with the Program Officer. c. Proprietary or Privileged Information if applicable Instructions for submission of proprietary or privileged information are provided in Chapter II.E.1. See also Chapter II.B. for additional information on Single Copy Documents. d. Proposal Certifications Provided by the Organization Government wide certifications and representations are provided by the proposer on an annual basis in SAM see PAPPG Chapter I.G.2 . Note that the box for Disclosure of Lobbying Activities must be checked on the Cover Sheet if, pursuant to the Lobbying certification provided in SAM, submission of the SF LLL is required. The AOR must use the Authorized Organizational Representative function to sign and submit the proposal, including NSF specific proposal certifications. It is the proposing organization s responsibility to assure that only properly authorized individuals perform this function.7 See also PAPPG Chapters II.F.8 and II.F.11 for additional information on proposal certifications. The required NSF specific proposal certifications are as follows i Certification for Authorized Organizational Representative AOR or Individual Proposer The AOR is required to complete certifications regarding the accuracy and completeness of statements contained in the proposal, as well as to certify that the organization or individual agrees to accept the obligation to comply with award terms and conditions. ii Certification Regarding Conflict of Interest The AOR is required to complete certifications stating that the organization has implemented and is enforcing a written policy on conflicts of interest COI , consistent with the provisions of Chapter IX.A that, to the best of the AOR s knowledge, all financial disclosures required by the conflict of interest policy were made and that conflicts of interest, if any, were, or prior to the organization s expenditure of any funds under the award, will be, satisfactorily managed, reduced or eliminated in accordance with the organization s conflict of interest policy. Conflicts that cannot be satisfactorily managed, reduced or eliminated, and research that proceeds without the imposition of conditions or restrictions when a conflict of interest exists, must be disclosed to NSF via use of NSF s electronic systems. 7 Detailed instructions for completion of this process are available in Research.gov.  Proposal Award Policies Procedures Guide II 6 NSF 23 1 iii Certification Regarding Flood Hazard Insurance8 Two sections of the National Flood Insurance Act of 1968 42 USC 4012a and 4106 bar Federal agencies from giving financial assistance for acquisition or construction purposes in any area identified by the Federal Emergency Management Agency FEMA as having special flood hazards unless the 1 community in which that area is located participates in the national flood insurance program and 2 building and any related equipment is covered by adequate flood insurance. By signing the certification pages, AORs for prospective recipients located in FEMA designated special flood hazard areas are certifying that adequate flood insurance has been or will be obtained in the following situations 1 for NSF awards for the construction of a building or facility, regardless of the dollar amount of the award and 2 for other NSF awards when more than 25,000 has been budgeted in the proposal for repair, alteration, or improvement construction of a building or facility. Prospective recipients should contact their local government or a Federally insured financial institution to determine what areas are identified as having special flood hazards and the availability of flood insurance in their community. iv Certification Regarding Responsible and Ethical Conduct of Research RECR Note The requirement specified in Section 7009 of the America Creating Opportunities to Meaningfully Promote Excellence in Technology, Education, and Science COMPETES Act 42 USC 1862o 1 , as amended, to have a plan to provide appropriate training and oversight in the responsible and ethical conduct of research to faculty and other senior personnel who will be supported by NSF to conduct research will go into effect for new proposals submitted or due on or after July 31, 2023. NSF, however, encourages the community to establish such training and oversight for faculty and other senior personnel prior to the July 31, 2023, implementation. In the interim, proposers must continue to meet the guidance specified in PAPPG Chapter IX.B. The AOR is required to complete a certification that the institution has a plan to provide appropriate training and oversight in the responsible and ethical conduct of research to undergraduate students, graduate students, postdoctoral researchers, faculty, and other senior personnel who will be supported by NSF to conduct research and that such training addresses mentor training and mentorship. NSF s RECR policy is available in Chapter IX.B. While training plans are not required to be included in proposals submitted to NSF, institutions are advised that they are subject to review upon request. NSF has provided funding to the Online Ethics Center for S E, an online collaborative resource environment that provides resources that may be used by the institution in developing their training plan. This site contains RECR resources by discipline, provides links to published codes of ethics, as well as includes pages dedicated to resources produced or used by specific professional groups. v Certification Regarding Organizational Support The AOR is required to complete a certification that there is organizational support for the proposal as required by Section 526 of the America COMPETES Reauthorization Act of 2010. This support extends to the portion of the proposal developed to satisfy the broader impacts review criterion as well as the intellectual merit review criterion, and any additional review criteria specified in the solicitation. Organizational support will be made available, as described in the proposal, in order to address the broader impacts and intellectual merit activities to be undertaken. 8 This government wide certification is not included in SAM and must be submitted as part of an NSF proposal.  Proposal Award Policies Procedures Guide II 7 NSF 23 1 vi Certification Regarding Dual Use Research of Concern The AOR is required to complete a certification that the organization will be or is in compliance with all aspects of the United States Government Policy for Institutional Oversight of Life Sciences Dual Use Research of Concern. vii Certification Requirement Specified in the William M. Mac Thornberry National Defense Authorization Act for Fiscal Year 2021, Section 223 a 1 42 USC 6605 a 1 The AOR is required to complete a certification that each individual employed by the organization and identified on the proposal as senior personnel has been made aware of the certification requirements identified in the William M. Mac Thornberry National Defense Authorization Act for Fiscal Year 2021, Section 223 a 1 42 USC 6605 a 1 . viii Certification Regarding Safe and Inclusive Working Environments for Off Campus or Off Site Research For each proposal that proposes to conduct research off campus or off site, the AOR must complete a certification that the organization has a plan in place for this proposal regarding safe and inclusive working environments. See Chapter II.E.9 for additional information. e. Certification Requirement for Senior Personnel Specified in the William M. Mac Thornberry National Defense Authorization Act for Fiscal Year 2021, Section 223 a 1 42 USC 6605 a 1 In accordance with Section 223 a 1 of the William M. Mac Thornberry National Defense Authorization Act for Fiscal Year 2021 42 USC 6605 a 1 , senior personnel are required to certify in SciENcv that the information provided in their Biographical Sketch and Current and Pending Support documents are accurate, current, and complete. Senior personnel are required to update their Current and Pending Support disclosures prior to award, and at any subsequent time the agency determines appropriate during the term of the award. False representations may be subject to prosecution and liability pursuant to, but not limited to, 18 U.S.C. 287, 1001, 1031 and 31 U.S.C. 3729 3733 and 3802. See additional information on NSF Disclosure Requirements in Chapter II.B. f. Submission of Proposals by Former NSF Staff For one year following separation from the Foundation, any communication with NSF by a former employee or IPA must be done through use of a substitute negotiator. Unless a substitute negotiator has been designated by the proposer recipient, the Division of Grants and Agreements DGA or the Division of Acquisition and Cooperative Support DACS will not process a new proposal with a former employee or IPA as PI or co PI. If it has been less than a year since a former employee separated from NSF or an IPA ended their appointment and they submit a proposal, documentation from the AOR needs to be included which designates a substitute negotiator for that proposal. The substitute negotiator must be from the same organization as the PI or co PI for whom the negotiator is required. A co PI on a new proposal should designate the PI as the substitute negotiator. This information should be submitted as a single copy document and uploaded in the Additional Single Copy Documents category. 2. Sections of the Proposal The sections described below represent the body of a research proposal submitted to NSF. Failure to submit the required sections will result in the proposal not being accepted9, or being returned without review. See Chapter IV.B for additional information. 9 Proposal Not Accepted is defined as Research.gov will not permit submission of the proposal by the AOR.  Proposal Award Policies Procedures Guide II 8 NSF 23 1 A full research proposal must contain the following sections10. Note that the NSF Grants.gov Application Guide may use different naming conventions, and sections may appear in a different order than in Research.gov, however, the content is the same a. Cover Sheet b. Project Summary c. Table of Contents d. Project Description e. References Cited f. Budget and Budget Justification g. Facilities, Equipment and Other Resources h. Senior Personnel Documents i Biographical Sketch es ii Current and Pending Support iii Collaborators and Other Affiliations see also PAPPG Chapter II.D.1 for additional information on submission of single copy documents i. Special Information and Supplementary Documentation11 i Postdoctoral Mentoring Plan if applicable ii Data Management Plan The proposal preparation instructions for Planning, RAPID, EAGER, RAISE, GOALI, Ideas Lab, FASED, conference, equipment, travel, center, research infrastructure, and fellowship proposal types may deviate from the above content requirements. All proposals submitted to NSF will be reviewed using the two NSB approved merit review criteria described in greater length in Chapter III. a. Cover Sheet There are seven components of the Cover Sheet. The Cover Sheet data elements are as follows Requested Start Date and Proposal Duration The proposed duration for which support is requested should be consistent with the nature and complexity of the proposed activity. The Foundation encourages proposers to request funding for durations of three to five years when such durations are necessary for completion of the proposed work and are technically and managerially advantageous. The requested start date should allow at least six months for NSF review, processing, and decision. PIs should consult their organization s SPO for unusual situations e.g., a long lead time for procurement that create problems regarding the proposed start date. Specification of a desired start date for the project is important and helpful to NSF staff however, requests for specific start dates may not be met. Related Letter of Intent LOI If an LOI was submitted, enter the LOI ID number that was issued upon submission. Related Preliminary Proposal If a preliminary proposal was submitted, and the organization was either invited or encouraged discouraged to submit a full proposal, provide the Preliminary Proposal Number. 10 See Chapter II.F. for the proposal preparation requirements for other types of proposals submitted to NSF. 11 See PAPPG Chapter II.D.2.i for additional information on submission of special information and supplementary documentation.  Proposal Award Policies Procedures Guide II 9 NSF 23 1 Prime Organization The information on the Awardee Organization is prefilled on the Cover Sheet based on the login information entered. NSF uses the legal business name and physical address from the organizations SAM registration. The awardee organization name, address, NSF organization code, UEI, and Employer Identification Number Taxpayer Identification Number are derived from the profile information provided by the organization or pulled by NSF from the SAM database and are not entered when preparing the Cover Sheet. Organizations must identify their status by checking all of the applicable boxes on the Cover Sheet o For profit organizations must be U.S. based commercial organizations, including small businesses, with strong capabilities in scientific or engineering research or education and a passion for innovation. See PAPPG Chapter I.E.3 for additional information. o A small business must be organized for profit, independently owned, and operated not a subsidiary of, or controlled by, another firm , have no more than 500 employees, and not be dominant in its field. o A minority business must be i at least 51 percent owned by one or more minority or disadvantaged individuals or, in the case of a publicly owned business, have at least 51 percent of the voting stock owned by one or more minority or disadvantaged individuals and ii one whose management and daily business operations are controlled by one or more such individuals. A woman owned business must be at least 51 percent owned by a woman or women, who also control and operate it. Control in this context means exercising the power to make policy decisions. Operate in this context means being actively involved in the day to day management. Primary Place of Performance The Primary Place of Performance PPoP information will default to the organization s physical address. If the project will be performed at a location other than the awardee organization, provide the following information where applicable . o Organization Name identify the organization name of the primary site where the work will be performed, if different than the awardee o Country o Street Address o City o State Territory and o 9 digit Postal Code. Note that not all fields listed above are required. Research.gov specifies the fields that are required for projects that will be performed at locations other than that of the proposing organization. For research infrastructure projects, the project performance site should correspond to the physical location of the asset. For research infrastructure that is mobile or geographically distributed, information for the primary site or organizational headquarters as defined by the proposer should be provided. Other Federal Agencies If the proposal is being submitted for consideration by another Federal agency, the abbreviated name s of the Federal agency ies must be identified in the space provided.  Proposal Award Policies Procedures Guide II 10 NSF 23 1 Other Information If any of the following items on the Cover Sheet are applicable to the proposal being submitted, the relevant box es must be checked. o Beginning Investigator See Chapter II.E.2 Note this box is applicable only to proposals submitted to the Biological Sciences Directorate. o Disclosure of Lobbying Activities See Chapter II.D.1.d o Proprietary or Privileged Information See Chapter II.D.1.c and II.E.1 o Special Exceptions to the Deadline Date Policy See Chapter I.F.3 o Historic Places See Chapter II.D.2.i vii o Live Vertebrate Animals12 See Chapter II.E.4 o Human Subjects13 See Chapter II.E.5 o Funding of an International Branch Campus of a U.S. IHE See Chapter I.E.1 If this box is checked, the proposer also must enter the name of the applicable country ies in the International Activities Country Name s box described below. o Funding of a Foreign Organization or Foreign Individual See Chapter I.E.6 If this box is checked, the proposer also must enter the name of the applicable country ies in the International Activities Country Name s box described below. o International Activities Country Name s each proposal that describes an international activity, proposers should list the primary countries involved. An international activity is defined as research, training, and or education carried out in cooperation with international counterparts either overseas or in the U.S. using virtual technologies. Proposers also should enter the country countries with which project participants will engage and or travel to attend international conferences. If the specific location of the international conference is not known at the time of the proposal submission, proposers should enter Worldwide . See Chapter II.E.8 o Potential Life Sciences Dual Use Research of Concern DURC See Chapters II.E.6 and XI.B.5 o Off Campus or Off Site Research For purposes of this requirement, off campus or off site research is defined as data information samples being collected off campus or off site, such as fieldwork and research activities on vessels and aircraft. See Chapter II.D.1.d viii and II.E.9 b. Project Summary The overview includes a description of the activity that would result if the proposal were funded and a statement of objectives and methods to be employed. The statement on intellectual merit should describe the potential of the proposed activity to advance knowledge. The statement on broader impacts should 12 If the proposal includes use of live vertebrate animals, supplemental information is required. See Chapter II.E.4. for additional information. 13 If the proposal includes use of human subjects, supplemental information is required. See Chapter II.E.5. for additional information.  Proposal Award Policies Procedures Guide II 11 NSF 23 1 describe the potential of the proposed activity to benefit society and contribute to the achievement of specific, desired societal outcomes. The Project Summary should be informative to other persons working in the same or related fields, and, insofar as possible, understandable to a broad audience within the scientific domain. It should not be an abstract of the proposal. c. Table of Contents A Table of Contents is automatically generated for the proposal. The proposer cannot edit this form. d. Project Description including Results from Prior NSF Support i Content The Project Description should provide a clear statement of the work to be undertaken and must include the objectives for the period of the proposed work and expected significance the relationship of this work to the present state of knowledge in the field, as well as to work in progress by the PI under other support. The Project Description should outline the general plan of work, including the broad design of activities to be undertaken, and, where appropriate, provide a clear description of experimental methods and procedures. Proposers should address what they want to do, why they want to do it, how they plan to do it, how they will know if they succeed, and what benefits could accrue if the project is successful. The project activities may be based on previously established and or innovative methods and approaches, but in either case must be well justified. These issues apply to both the technical aspects of the proposal and the way in which the project may make broader contributions. The Project Description also must contain, as a separate section within the narrative, a section labeled Broader Impacts . This section should provide a discussion of the broader impacts of the proposed activities. Broader impacts may be accomplished through the research itself, through the activities that are directly related to specific research projects, or through activities that are supported by, but are complementary to the project. NSF values the advancement of scientific knowledge and activities that contribute to the achievement of societally relevant outcomes. Such outcomes include, but are not limited to full participation of women, persons with disabilities, and underrepresented minorities in science, technology, engineering, and mathematics STEM improved STEM education and educator development at any level increased public scientific literacy and public engagement with science and technology improved well being of individuals in society development of a diverse, globally competitive STEM workforce increased partnerships between academia, industry, and others improved national security increased economic competitiveness of the U.S. use of science and technology to inform public policy and enhanced infrastructure for research and education. These examples of societally relevant outcomes should not be considered either comprehensive or prescriptive. Proposers may include appropriate outcomes not covered by these examples. Plans for data management and sharing of the products of research, including preservation, documentation, and sharing of data, samples, physical collections, curriculum materials and other related research and education products should be described in the Special Information and Supplementary Documentation section of the proposal see Chapter II.D.2.i ii for additional instructions for preparation of this section . For proposals that include funding to an International Branch Campus of a U.S. IHE or to a foreign organization or foreign individual including through use of a subaward or consultant arrangement , the proposer must provide the requisite explanation justification in the project description. See Chapter I.E for additional information on the content requirements.  Proposal Award Policies Procedures Guide II 12 NSF 23 1 ii Page Limitations and Inclusion of Uniform Resource Locators URLs within the Project Description Brevity will assist reviewers and Foundation staff in dealing effectively with proposals. Therefore, the Project Description including Results from Prior NSF Support, which is limited to five pages may not exceed 15 pages. Visual materials, including charts, graphs, maps, photographs, and other pictorial presentations are included in the 15 page limitation. PIs are cautioned that the Project Description must be self contained, and that URLs must not be used because 1 the information could circumvent page limitations 2 the reviewers are under no obligation to view the sites and 3 the sites could be altered or deleted between the time of submission and the time of review. Conformance to the 15 page limit will be strictly enforced and may not be exceeded unless a deviation has been specifically authorized. Chapter II.A contains information on deviations. iii Results from Prior NSF Support The purpose of this section is to assist reviewers in assessing the quality of prior work conducted with prior or current NSF funding. If any PI or co PI identified on the proposal has received prior NSF support including an award with an end date in the past five years or any current funding, including any no cost extensions, information on the award is required for each PI and co PI, regardless of whether the support was directly related to the proposal or not. In cases where the PI or any co PI has received more than one award excluding amendments to existing awards , they need only report on the one award that is most closely related to the proposal. Support means salary support, as well as any other funding awarded by NSF, including research, Graduate Research Fellowship, Major Research Instrumentation, conference, equipment, travel, and center awards, etc. The following information must be provided a the NSF award number, amount and period of support b the title of the project c a summary of the results of the completed work, including accomplishments, supported by the award. The results must be separately described under two distinct headings Intellectual Merit and Broader Impacts d a listing of the publications resulting from the NSF award a complete bibliographic citation for each publication must be provided either in this section or in the References Cited section of the proposal if none, state No publications were produced under this award. e evidence of research products and their availability, including, but not limited to data, publications, samples, physical collections, software, and models, as described in any Data Management Plan and f if the proposal is for renewed support, a description of the relation of the completed work to the proposed work. If the project was recently awarded and therefore no new results exist, describe the major goals and broader impacts of the project. Note that the proposal may contain up to five pages to describe the results. Results  Proposal Award Policies Procedures Guide II 13 NSF 23 1 may be summarized in fewer than five pages, which would give the balance of the 15 pages for the Project Description. iv Unfunded Collaborations Any substantial collaboration with individuals not included in the budget should be described in the Facilities, Equipment and Other Resources section of the proposal see Chapter II.D.2.g and documented in a letter of collaboration from each collaborator. Such letters should be provided in the supplementary documentation section of Research.gov and follow the format instructions specified in Chapter II.D.2.i. Collaborative activities that are identified in the budget should follow the instructions in Chapter II.E.3. v Group Proposals NSF encourages submission of proposals by groups of investigators often these are submitted to carry out interdisciplinary projects. Unless stipulated in a specific program solicitation, however, such proposals will be subject to the 15 page Project Description limitation established in Section ii above. PIs who wish to exceed the established page limitations for the Project Description must request and receive a deviation in advance of proposal submission. Chapter II.A contains information on deviations. vi Proposals for Renewed Support See Chapter V for guidance on preparation of renewal proposals. e. References Cited Reference information is required. Each reference must include the names of all authors in the same sequence in which they appear in the publication , the article and journal title, book title, volume number, page numbers, and year of publication. See also Chapter II.D.2.d iii d If the proposer has a website address readily available, that information should be included in the citation. It is not NSF s intent, however, to place an undue burden on proposers to search for the URL of every referenced publication. Therefore, inclusion of a website address is optional. A proposal that includes reference citation s that do not specify a URL is not considered to be in violation of NSF proposal preparation guidelines and the proposal will still be reviewed. Proposers must be especially careful to follow accepted scholarly practices in providing citations for source materials relied upon when preparing any section of the proposal. While there is no established page limitation for the references, this section must include bibliographic citations only and must not be used to provide parenthetical information outside of the 15 page Project Description. f. Budget and Budget Justification The proposal budget sets forth how much money the proposer is requesting, by category, to complete the project. The budget justification provides a more detailed breakdown of proposed spending in each category as well as a justification supporting the numbers provided in each budget category. This information is relied upon by NSF in formulating the total award amount and final award budget that is incorporated into any resultant award. See PAPPG Chapter VI.B.1. Each proposal must contain a budget for each year of support requested. The budget justification must be no more than five pages per proposal. The amounts for each budget line item requested must be documented and justified in the budget justification as specified below. For proposals that contain a subaward s , each subaward must include a separate budget justification of no more than five pages. See Chapter II.D.2.f vi e for further instructions on proposals that contain subawards. For collaborative proposals submitted by multiple organizations, each organization must include a separate budget justification of no more than five pages.  Proposal Award Policies Procedures Guide II 14 NSF 23 1 The proposal may request funds under any of the categories listed so long as the item and amount are considered necessary, reasonable, allocable, and allowable under 2 CFR 200, Subpart E, NSF policy, and or the program solicitation. For profit entities are subject to the cost principles contained in the Federal Acquisition Regulation, Part 31. Amounts and expenses budgeted also must be consistent with the proposing organization s policies and procedures and cost accounting practices used in accumulating and reporting costs. Proposals for mid scale and major facilities also should consult NSF s Research Infrastructure Guide as well as the relevant solicitation for additional budgetary preparation guidelines. i Salaries and Wages Lines A and B on the Proposal Budget a Senior Personnel Salaries Wages Policy NSF regards research as one of the normal functions of faculty members at institutions of higher education. Compensation for time normally spent on research within the term of appointment is deemed to be included within the faculty member s regular organizational salary. As a general policy, NSF limits the salary compensation requested in the proposal budget for senior personnel to no more than two months of their regular salary in any one year. See Exhibit II 3 for the definitions of Senior Personnel. It is the organization s responsibility to define and consistently apply the term year , and to specify this definition in the budget justification. This limit includes salary compensation received from all NSF funded grants. This effort must be documented in accordance with 2 CFR 200, Subpart E, including 2 CFR 200.430 i . If anticipated, any compensation for such personnel in excess of two months must be disclosed in the proposal budget, justified in the budget justification, and must be specifically approved by NSF in the award notice budget.14 Under normal rebudgeting authority, as described in Chapters VII and X, a recipient can internally approve an increase or decrease in person months devoted to the project after an award is made, even if doing so results in salary support for senior personnel exceeding the two month salary policy. No prior approval from NSF is necessary unless the rebudgeting would cause the objectives or scope of the project to change. NSF prior approval is necessary if the objectives or scope of the project change. These same general principles apply to other types of non academic organizations. b Administrative and Clerical Salaries Wages Policy In accordance with 2 CFR 200.413, the salaries of administrative and clerical staff should normally be treated as indirect costs F A . Direct charging of these costs may be appropriate only if all the conditions identified below are met i Administrative or clerical services are integral to a project or activity ii Individuals involved can be specifically identified with the project or activity iii Such costs are explicitly included in the approved budget or have the prior written approval of the cognizant NSF Grants and Agreements Officer and iv The costs are not also recovered as indirect costs. 14 NSF recipients remain subject to the provisions of OMB M 01 06, Clarification of OMB A 21 Treatment of Voluntary Uncommitted Cost Sharing and Tuition Remission Costs regarding requirements for committing and tracking some level of faculty or senior researcher effort as part of the organized research base.  Proposal Award Policies Procedures Guide II 15 NSF 23 1 Conditions i ii and iv above are particularly relevant for consideration at the budget preparation stage. c Procedures The names of the PI s , faculty, and other senior personnel and the estimated number of full time equivalent person months for which NSF funding is requested, and the total amount of salaries requested per year, must be listed. For consistency with the NSF cost sharing policy, if person months will be requested for senior personnel, a corresponding salary amount must be entered on the budget. If salary and person months are not being requested for an individual designated as senior personnel, they should be removed from Section A of the budget. Their name s will remain on the Cover Sheet and the individual s role on the project should be described in the Facilities, Equipment and Other Resources section of the proposal. For postdoctoral associates and other professionals, the total number of persons for each position must be listed, with the number of full time equivalent person months and total amount of salaries requested per year. For graduate and undergraduate students, secretarial, clerical, technical, etc., whose time will be charged directly to the project, only the total number of persons and total amount of salaries requested per year in each category is required. Compensation classified as salary payments must be requested in the salaries and wages category. Salaries requested must be consistent with the organization s regular practices. The budget justification should detail the rates of pay by individual for senior personnel, postdoctoral associates, and other professionals. d Confidential Budgetary Information The proposing organization may request that salary data on senior personnel not be released to persons outside the Government during the review process. In such cases, the item for senior personnel salaries in the proposal may appear as a single figure and the person months represented by that amount omitted. If this option is exercised, senior personnel salaries and person months must be itemized in a separate statement and forwarded to NSF in accordance with the instructions specified in Chapter II.E.1. This statement must include all of the information requested on the proposal budget for each person involved. NSF will not forward the detailed information to reviewers and will hold it privileged to the extent permitted by law. The information on senior personnel salaries will be used as the basis for determining the salary amounts shown in the budget. The box for Proprietary or Privileged Information must be checked on the Cover Sheet when the proposal contains confidential budgetary information.15 ii Fringe Benefits Line C on the Proposal Budget If the proposer s usual accounting practices provide that its contributions to employee benefits leave, employee insurance, social security, retirement, other payroll related taxes, etc. be treated as direct costs, NSF award funds may be requested to fund fringe benefits as a direct cost. These are typically determined by application of a calculated fringe benefit rate for a particular class of employee full time or part time applied to the salaries and wages requested. They also may be paid based on actual costs for individual employees if that institutional policy has been approved by the cognizant Federal agency. See 2 CFR 200.431 for the definition and allowability of inclusion of fringe benefits on a proposal budget. iii Equipment Line D on the Proposal Budget Equipment is defined as tangible personal property including information technology systems having a useful life of more than one year and a per unit acquisition cost which equals or exceeds the lesser of the capitalization level established by the proposer for financial statement purposes, or 5,000. It is important to note that the acquisition cost of equipment includes modifications, attachments, and accessories necessary to make an item of equipment usable for the purpose for which it will be purchased. Items of needed equipment must be adequately justified, listed individually by description and estimated cost. 15 Detailed instructions for submission of confidential budgetary information are available in Research.gov.  Proposal Award Policies Procedures Guide II 16 NSF 23 1 Allowable items ordinarily will be limited to research equipment and apparatus not already available for the conduct of the work. General purpose equipment such as office equipment and furnishings, and information technology equipment and systems are typically not eligible for direct cost support. Special purpose or scientific use computers or associated hardware and software, however, may be requested as items of equipment when necessary to accomplish the project objectives and not otherwise reasonably available. Any request to support such items must be clearly disclosed in the proposal budget, justified in the budget justification, and be included in the NSF award budget. See 2 CFR 200.313 and 200.439 for additional information. iv Travel Line E on the Proposal Budget a General When anticipated, travel and its relation to the proposed activities must be specified, itemized, and justified by destination and cost. Funds may be requested for field work, attendance at meetings and conferences, and other travel associated with the proposed work, including subsistence. To qualify for support, however, attendance at meetings or conferences must be necessary to accomplish proposal objectives or disseminate research results. Travel support for dependents of key project personnel may be requested only when the travel is for a duration of six months or more either by inclusion in the approved budget or with the prior written approval of the cognizant NSF Grants and Agreements Officer. Temporary dependent care costs above and beyond regular dependent care that directly result from travel to conferences are allowable costs provided that the conditions established in 2 CFR 200.475 are met. Allowance for air travel normally will not exceed the cost of round trip, economy airfares. Persons traveling under NSF awards must travel by U.S. Flag Air carriers, if available. b Domestic Travel Domestic travel includes travel within and between the U.S., its territories, and possessions.16 Travel, meal, and hotel expenses of recipient employees who are not on travel status are unallowable. Costs of employees on travel status are limited to those specifically authorized by 2 CFR 200.475. c Foreign Travel Travel outside the areas specified above is considered foreign travel. When anticipated, the proposer must enter the names of countries and dates of visit on the proposal budget, if known. v Participant Support Line F on the Proposal Budget This budget category refers to direct costs for items such as stipends or subsistence allowances, travel allowances, and registration fees paid to or on behalf of participants or trainees but not employees in connection with NSF sponsored conferences or training projects. Any additional categories of participant support costs other than those described in 2 CFR 200.1 such as incentives, gifts, souvenirs, t shirts, and memorabilia , must be justified in the budget justification, and such costs will be closely scrutinized by NSF. See also Chapter II.F.7. Speakers and trainers generally are not considered participants and should not be included in this section of the budget. However, if the primary purpose of the individual s attendance at the conference is learning and receiving training as a participant, then the costs may be included under participant support. If the primary purpose is to speak or assist with management of the conference, then such costs should be budgeted in appropriate categories other than participant support. 16 According to the IRS, US territories and possessions are as follows Puerto Rico, US Virgin Islands, Guam, American Samoa, the Commonwealth of the Northern Mariana Islands, Midway Island, Wake Island, Palmyra Island, Howland Island, Johnston Island, Baker Island, Kingman Reef, Jarvis Island, and other US islands, cays, and reefs that are not part of the 50 States.  Proposal Award Policies Procedures Guide II 17 NSF 23 1 For some educational projects conducted at local school districts, the participants being trained are employees. In such cases, the costs must be classified as participant support if payment is made through a stipend or training allowance method. The school district must have an accounting mechanism in place i.e., sub account code to differentiate between regular salary and stipend payments. To help defray the costs of participating in a conference or training activity, funds may be proposed for payment of stipends, per diem or subsistence allowances, based on the type and duration of the activity. Such allowances must be reasonable, in conformance with the policy of the proposing organization and limited to the days of attendance at the conference plus the actual travel time required to reach the conference location. Where meals or lodgings are furnished without charge or at a nominal cost e.g., as part of the registration fee , the per diem or subsistence allowance should be correspondingly reduced. Although local participants may participate in conference meals and coffee breaks, funds may not be proposed to pay per diem or similar expenses for local participants in the conference. Costs related to an NSF sponsored conference e.g., venue rental fees, catering costs, supplies, etc. that will be secured through a service agreement contract should be budgeted on line G.6., Other Direct Costs to ensure appropriate allocation of indirect costs. This section of the budget also may not be used for incentive payments to research subjects. Human subject payments should be included on line G.6. of the NSF budget under Other Direct Costs, and any applicable indirect costs should be calculated on the payments in accordance with the organization s Federally negotiated indirect cost rate. Funds may be requested for the travel costs of participants. If so, the restrictions regarding class of accommodations and use of U.S. Flag air carriers are applicable.17 In training activities that involve off site field work, costs of transportation of participants are allowable. The number of participants to be supported must be entered in the parentheses on the proposal budget. Participant support costs must be specified, itemized, and justified in the budget justification section of the proposal. Indirect costs F A are not usually allowed on costs budgeted as participant support unless the recipient s current, Federally approved indirect cost rate agreement provides for allocation of F A to participant support costs. Participant support costs must be accounted for separately should an award be made. vi Other Direct Costs Lines G1 through G6 on the Proposal Budget Any costs proposed to an NSF project must be allowable, reasonable, and directly allocable to the supported activity. When anticipated, the budget must identify and itemize other anticipated direct costs not included under the headings above, including materials and supplies, publication costs, and computer and vendor services. Examples include aircraft rental, space rental at research establishments away from the proposing organization, minor building alterations, payments to human subjects, and service charges. Reference books and periodicals only may be included on the proposal budget if they are specifically allocable to the project being supported by NSF. a Materials and Supplies including Costs of Computing Devices Line G1 on the Proposal Budget When anticipated, the proposal budget justification must indicate the general types of expendable materials and supplies required. Supplies are defined as all tangible personal property other than those described in paragraph d iii above. A computing device is considered a supply if the acquisition cost is less than the lesser of the capitalization level established by the proposer or 5,000, regardless of the length of its useful life. In the specific case of computing devices, charging as a direct cost is allowable for devices that are essential and allocable, but not solely dedicated, to the performance of the NSF project. Details and justification must be included for items requested to support the project. 17 See Chapter XI.F, Grant General Conditions GC 1 Article 10, and Article 14 in the NSF Agency Specific Requirements to the Research Terms and Conditions, as applicable, for additional information on travel restrictions.  Proposal Award Policies Procedures Guide II 18 NSF 23 1 b Publication Documentation Dissemination Line G2 on the Proposal Budget The proposal budget may request funds for the costs of documenting, preparing, publishing or otherwise making available to others the findings and products of the work to be conducted under the award. This generally includes the following types of activities reports, reprints, page charges or other journal costs except costs for prior or early publication necessary illustrations cleanup, documentation, storage and indexing of data and databases development, documentation and debugging of software and storage, preservation, documentation, indexing, etc., of physical specimens, collections, or fabricated items. Line G.2. of the proposal budget also may be used to request funding for data deposit and data curation costs.18 c Consultant Services also referred to as Professional Service Costs Line G3 on the Proposal Budget 19 The proposal budget may request costs for professional and consultant services. Professional and consultant services are services rendered by persons who are members of a particular profession or possess a special skill, and who are not officers or employees of the proposing organization. Costs of professional and consultant services are allowable when reasonable in relation to the services rendered and when not contingent upon recovery of costs from the Federal government. Anticipated services must be justified, and information furnished on each individual s expertise, primary organizational affiliation, normal daily compensation rate, and number of days of expected service. Consultants travel costs, including subsistence, may be included. If requested, the proposer must be able to justify that the proposed rate of pay is reasonable. Additional information on the allowability of consultant or professional service costs is available in 2 CFR 200.459. In addition to other provisions required by the proposing organization, all contracts made under the NSF award must contain the applicable provisions identified in 2 CFR 200 Appendix II. d Computer Services Line G4 on the Proposal Budget The cost of computer services, including computer based retrieval of scientific, technical, and educational information, may be requested only where it is institutional policy to charge such costs as direct charges. A justification based on the established computer service rates at the proposing organization must be included. The proposal budget also may request costs for leasing of computer equipment. e Subawards2021 Line G5 on the Proposal Budget Except for the purpose of obtaining goods and services for the proposer s own use which creates a procurement relationship with a contractor, no portion of the proposed activity may be subawarded or transferred to another organization without prior written NSF authorization. Such authorization must be provided either through approval specifically granted in the award notice or by receiving written prior approval from the cognizant NSF Grants and Agreements Officer after an award is issued. If the subaward organization is changed, prior approval of the new subaward organization must be obtained from the cognizant NSF Grants and Agreements Officer. If known at the time of proposal submission, the intent to enter into such arrangements must be disclosed in the proposal. A separate budget and a budget justification of no more than five pages, must be provided 18 A data deposit cost is a one time charge paid at the time a data set is deposited into a data repository. Data curation costs are expenses associated with preparing data into a form that others can use. 19 In the rare case of funding to a foreign organization or foreign individual, see Chapter I.E.2 for additional requirements. 20 A subaward may be provided through any form of legal agreement, including an agreement that the proposing organization considers a contract. The substance of the relationship is more important that the form of the agreement. 21 In the rare case of funding to a foreign organization or foreign individual, see Chapter I.E.2 for additional requirements.  Proposal Award Policies Procedures Guide II 19 NSF 23 1 for each subrecipient, if already identified. The description of the work to be performed must be included in the project description. All proposing organizations are required to make a case by case determination regarding the role of a subrecipient versus contractor for each agreement it makes. 2 CFR 200.331 provides characteristics of each type of arrangement to assist proposing organizations in making that determination. However, inclusion of a subaward or contract in the proposal budget or submission of a request after issuance of an NSF award to add a subaward or contract will document the required organizational determination. NSF does not negotiate rates for organizations that are not direct recipients of NSF funding e.g., subrecipients . Consistent with 2 CFR 200.332, NSF recipients must use the domestic subrecipient s applicable U.S. Federally negotiated indirect cost rate s . If no such rate exists, the NSF recipient must determine the appropriate rate in collaboration with the subrecipient. The appropriate rate will be a negotiated rate between the NSF recipient and the subrecipient a prior rate negotiated between a different pass through entity and the same subrecipient, or the de minimis indirect cost recovery rate of 10 of modified total direct costs. It is also NSF s expectation that NSF recipients will use foreign subrecipients applicable U.S. Federally negotiated indirect cost rate s . However, if no such rate exists, the NSF recipient will fund the foreign subrecipient using the de minimis indirect cost rate recovery of 10 of modified total direct costs. See also Chapter I.E.2. for additional requirements on issuance of a subaward or consultant arrangement to a foreign organization or a foreign individual. Proposers are responsible for ensuring that proposed subrecipient costs, including indirect costs, are reasonable and appropriate. f Other Line G6 on the Proposal Budget 22 Any other direct costs not specified in Lines G.1. through G.5. must be identified on Line G.6. Such costs must be itemized and detailed in the budget justification. Examples include Contracts for the purpose of obtaining goods and services for the proposer s own use see 2 CFR 200.331 for additional information and Incentive payments, for example, payments to human subjects or incentives to promote completion of a survey, should be included on line G.6. of the NSF budget. Incentive payments should be proposed in accordance with organizational policies and procedures. Indirect costs should be calculated on incentive payments in accordance with the organization s approved U.S. Federally negotiated indirect cost rate s . Performance based incentive payments to employees as described in 2 CFR 200.430 f should not be included in this section of the budget. vii Total Direct Costs Line H on the Proposal Budget The total amount of direct costs requested in the budget, to include Lines A through G, must be entered on Line H. viii Indirect Costs also known as Facilities and Administrative Costs F A for Colleges and Universities Line I on the Proposal Budget Except where specifically identified in an NSF program solicitation, the applicable U.S. Federally negotiated indirect cost rate s must be used in computing indirect costs F A for a proposal. Use of an indirect cost 22 In the rare case of funding to a foreign organization or foreign individual, see Chapter I.E.2 for additional requirements.  Proposal Award Policies Procedures Guide II 20 NSF 23 1 rate lower than the organization s current negotiated indirect cost rate is considered a violation of NSF s cost sharing policy. See section xii below. The amount for indirect costs must be calculated by applying the current negotiated indirect cost rate s to the approved base s , and such amounts must be specified in the budget justification. Indirect cost recovery for IHEs is additionally restricted by 2 CFR 200, Appendix III, paragraph C.7. which specifies Federal agencies are required to use the negotiated F A rate that is in effect at the time of the initial award throughout the life of the sponsored agreement. Additional information on the charging of indirect costs to an NSF award is available in Chapter X.D. Domestic proposing organizations that do not have a current negotiated rate agreement with a cognizant Federal agency may choose to apply the de minimis rate of 10 to a base of modified total direct costs MTDC as authorized by 2 CFR 200.414 f . No supporting documentation is required for proposed rates of 10 or less of modified total direct costs. Organizations without a current negotiated indirect cost rate agreement and that wish to request indirect cost rate recovery above 10 should prepare an indirect cost proposal based on expenditures for its most recently ended fiscal year. Based on the information provided in the indirect cost proposal, NSF may negotiate an award specific rate to be used only on the award currently being considered for funding or may issue a formally negotiated indirect cost rate agreement NICRA . The contents and financial data included in indirect cost proposals vary according to the make up of the proposing organization. Instructions for preparing an indirect cost rate proposal can be found on the NSF website. NSF formally negotiates indirect cost rates for the organizations for which NSF has rate cognizance. NSF does not negotiate rates for entities that do not yet hold direct NSF funding, nor does NSF negotiate rates for subrecipients. Foreign organizations that do not have a current U.S. Federally negotiated indirect cost rate s are limited to a de minimis indirect cost rate recovery of 10 of modified total direct costs. Foreign recipients that have a U.S. Federally negotiated indirect cost rate s may recover indirect costs at the current negotiated rate. ix Total Direct and Indirect Costs F A Line J on the Proposal Budget The total amount of direct and indirect costs F A sum of Lines H and I must be entered on Line J. x Fees Line K on the Proposal Budget This line is available for use only by the SBIR STTR programs and Major Facilities programs when specified in the solicitation. xi Amount of This Request Line L on the Proposal Budget The total amount of funds requested by the proposer. xii Cost Sharing Line M on the Proposal Budget The National Science Board issued a report entitled Investing in the Future NSF Cost Sharing Policies for a Robust Federal Research Enterprise NSB 09 20, August 3, 2009 , which contained eight recommendations for NSF regarding cost sharing. In implementation of the Board s recommendation, NSF s guidance23 is as follows Voluntary Committed and Uncommitted Cost Sharing As stipulated in 2 CFR 200.1, Voluntary committed cost sharing means cost sharing specifically pledged on a voluntary basis in the proposal s budget or the Federal award on the part of the non Federal entity and that becomes a binding requirement of Federal award. As such, to be considered voluntary committed cost sharing, the amount must appear on the NSF proposal budget and be specifically identified in the approved 23 See NSF s Revised Cost Sharing Policy Statement for the Foundation s overarching policies on cost sharing.  Proposal Award Policies Procedures Guide II 21 NSF 23 1 NSF budget.24 Unless required by NSF see the section on Mandatory Cost Sharing below , inclusion of voluntary committed cost sharing is prohibited and Line M on the proposal budget will not be available for use by the proposer. NSF Program Officers are not authorized to impose or encourage mandatory cost sharing unless such requirements are explicitly included in the program solicitation. In order for NSF, and its reviewers, to assess the scope of a proposed project, all organizational resources necessary for, and available to, a project must be described in the Facilities, Equipment and Other Resources section of the proposal see Chapter II.D.2.g for further information . While not required by NSF, the recipient may, at its own discretion, continue to contribute voluntary uncommitted cost sharing to NSF sponsored projects. As noted above, however, these resources are not auditable by NSF and should not be included in the proposal budget or budget justification. Mandatory Cost Sharing Mandatory cost sharing will only be required for NSF programs when explicitly authorized by the NSF Director, the NSB, or legislation. A complete listing of NSF programs that require cost sharing is available on the NSF website.. In these programs, cost sharing requirements will be clearly identified in the solicitation and must be included on Line M of the proposal budget. For purposes of budget preparation, the cumulative cost sharing amount must be entered on Line M of the first year s budget. Should an award be made, the organization s cost sharing commitment, as specified on the first year s approved budget, must be met prior to the award end date. Such cost sharing will be considered as an eligibility, rather than a review criterion. Proposers are advised not to exceed the mandatory cost sharing level or amount specified in the solicitation.25 When mandatory cost sharing is included on Line M, and accepted by the Foundation, the commitment of funds becomes legally binding and is subject to audit. When applicable, the estimated value of any in kind contributions also should be included on Line M. An explanation of the source, nature, amount, and availability of any proposed cost sharing must be provided in the budget justification26. It should be noted that contributions derived from other Federal funds or counted as cost sharing toward projects of another Federal agency must not be counted towards meeting the specific cost sharing requirements of the NSF award. Failure to provide the level of cost sharing required by the NSF solicitation and reflected in the NSF award budget may result in termination of the NSF award, disallowance of award costs and or refund of award funds to NSF by the recipient. xiii Allowable and Unallowable Costs 2 CFR 200, Subpart E provides comprehensive information regarding costs allowable under Federal awards. The following categories of unallowable costs are highlighted because of their sensitivity a Entertainment Costs of entertainment, amusement, diversion and social activities, and any costs directly associated with such activities such as tickets to shows or sporting events, meals, lodging, rentals, transportation, and gratuities are unallowable. When costs typically considered as entertainment are necessary to accomplish the proposed objectives, they must be included in the budget and justified in the budget justification. Travel, 24 Inclusion in the Budget Justification also meets this definition. 25 For further information on procedures for inclusion of programmatic cost sharing in an NSF solicitation, see 26 2 CFR 200.306 describes criteria and procedures for the allowability of cash and in kind contributions in satisfying cost sharing and matching requirements.  Proposal Award Policies Procedures Guide II 22 NSF 23 1 meal, and hotel expenses of recipient employees who are not on travel status are unallowable. See also 2 CFR 200.438. b Meals and Coffee Breaks No funds may be requested for meals or coffee breaks for intramural meetings of an organization or any of its components, including, but not limited to, laboratories, departments, and centers. See 2 CFR 200.432, for additional information on the charging of certain types of costs generally associated with conferences supported by NSF. Meal expenses of recipient employees who are not on travel status are unallowable. See also 2 CFR 200.438 c Alcoholic Beverages No NSF funds may be requested or spent for alcoholic beverages. d Home Office Workspace Rental of any property owned by individuals or entities affiliated with NSF recipients including commercial or residential real estate , for use as home office workspace is unallowable. See 2 CFR 200.465 f . e Prohibition on Certain Telecommunications and Video Surveillance Services or Equipment Section 889 of the National Defense Authorization Act NDAA for Fiscal Year FY 2019 Public Law 115 232 prohibits the head of an executive agency from obligating or expending loan or grant funds to procure or obtain, extend, or renew a contract to procure or obtain, or enter into a contract or extend or renew a contract to procure or obtain the equipment, services, or systems as identified in section 889 of the NDAA for FY 2019. See 2 CFR 200.216, 200.471, PAPPG Chapter X.F, and the applicable award terms and conditions for additional information. g. Facilities, Equipment and Other Resources This section of the proposal is used to assess the adequacy of the resources available to perform the effort proposed to satisfy both the Intellectual Merit and Broader Impacts review criteria. Proposers should describe only those resources that are directly applicable. Proposers should include an aggregated description of the internal and external resources both physical and personnel that the organization and its collaborators, and subawardees will provide to the project, should it be funded. Such information must be provided in this section, in lieu of other parts of the proposal e.g., Budget Justification, Project Description . The description should be narrative in nature and must not include any quantifiable financial information. Reviewers will evaluate the information during the merit review process and the cognizant NSF Program Officer will review it for programmatic and technical sufficiency. Although these resources are not considered voluntary committed cost sharing as defined in 2 CFR 200.1, the Foundation does expect that the resources identified in the Facilities, Equipment and Other Resources section will be provided, or made available, should the proposal be funded. Chapter VII.B.1 specifies procedures for use by the recipient when there are postaward changes to objectives, scope, or methods procedures.  Proposal Award Policies Procedures Guide II 23 NSF 23 1 h. Senior Personnel Documents i Biographical Sketch es Note The mandate to use SciENcv only for preparation of the biographical sketch will go into effect for new proposals submitted or due on or after October 23, 2023. In the interim, proposers may continue to prepare and submit this document via use of SciENcv or the NSF fillable PDF. NSF, however, encourages the community to use SciENcv prior to the October 2023 implementation. a Senior Personnel This section of the proposal is used to assess how well qualified the individual, team, or organization is to conduct the proposed activities. A biographical sketch limited to three pages must be provided separately for each individual designated as senior personnel through use of SciENcv Science Experts Network Curriculum Vitae . SciENcv will produce an NSF compliant PDF version of the biographical sketch. Senior personnel must prepare, save, certify, and submit these documents as part of their proposal via Research.gov or Grants.gov. Senior personnel include the individuals designated by the proposer awardee organization and approved by NSF who contribute in a substantive, meaningful way to the scientific development or execution of a research and development project proposed to be carried out with a research and development award.27 A table entitled, NSPM 33 Implementation Guidance Pre and Post award Disclosures Relating to the Biographical Sketch and Current and Pending Other Support28 has been created to provide helpful reference information regarding pre award and post award disclosures. The table includes the types of activities to be reported, where such activities must be reported in the proposal, as well as when updates are required in the proposal and award lifecycle. A final column identifies activities that are not required to be reported. Inclusion of additional information beyond that specified below may result in the proposal being returned without review. Do not submit any personal information in the biographical sketch. This includes items such as home address home telephone, fax, or cell phone numbers home e mail address driver s license number marital status personal hobbies and the like. Such personal information is not appropriate for the biographical sketch and is not relevant to the merits of the proposal. NSF is not responsible or in any way liable for the release of such material. See also Chapter III.H . The format of the biographical sketch is as follows required 1 Identifying Information i Name Enter the name of the senior person Last name, First name, Middle name, including any applicable suffix . ii ORCID ID29 Optional Enter the ORCID ID of the senior person. iii Position Title Enter the current position title of the senior person. 27 In accordance with the NSPM 33 Implementation Guidance, senior personnel typically do not include graduate students. 28 This table supersedes in its entirety, Table 2a and Paragraph 7 of the Disclosure Requirements and Standardization Section of the NSPM 33 Implementation Guidance. 29 See for information on obtaining an ORCID ID.  Proposal Award Policies Procedures Guide II 24 NSF 23 1 2 Organization and Location i Name Enter the name of the primary organization of the senior person. ii Location Enter the City, State Province, and Country where the primary organization is located. If the State Province is not applicable, enter N A. Indicate virtual if the project is not based in a physical location. 3 Professional Preparation Provide a list of the senior person s professional preparation e.g., education and training , listed in reverse chronological order by start date. Include all postdoctoral and fellowship training, as applicable, listing each separately. Also include the baccalaureate degree or other initial professional education. For each entry provide the name of the organization the location of the organization Enter the City, State Province, and Country where the primary organization is located. If the State Province is not applicable, enter N A. the degree received if applicable the month and year the degree was received or expected receipt date . For fellowship applicants only, also include the start date of the fellowship and the field of study. 4 Appointments and Positions Provide a list, in reverse chronological order by start date, of all the senior person s academic, professional, or institutional appointments and positions, beginning with the current appointment including the associated organization and location . Appointments and positions include any titled academic, professional, or institutional position whether or not remuneration is received, and whether full time, part time, or voluntary including adjunct, visiting, or honorary . For each entry provide Start date YYYY End date YYYY Appointment or Position Title Name of organization Department if applicable Location of organization City, State Province, Country With regard to professional appointments, senior personnel must only identify all current domestic and foreign professional appointments outside of the individual s academic, professional, or institutional appointments at the proposing organization. 5 Products Provide a list of i up to five products most closely related to the proposed project and ii up to five other significant products, whether or not related to the proposed project that demonstrate the senior person s  Proposal Award Policies Procedures Guide II 25 NSF 23 1 qualifications to carry out the project as proposed. Acceptable products must be citable and accessible, including but not limited to publications, conference papers, and presentations website s or other Internet site s technologies or techniques inventions, patent applications, and or licenses and other products, such as data, databases, or datasets, physical collections, audio or video products, software, models, educational aids or curricula, instruments or equipment, research material, interventions e.g., clinical or educational , or new business creation. Only the list of ten will be used in the review of the proposal. Each product must include full citation information including names of authors product title date of publication or release website URL other persistent identifier if available and other relevant citation information e.g., in the case of publications, title of enclosing work such as journal or book, volume, issue, pages . If any of the items specified above is not applicable, enter N A. Senior personnel who wish to include publications in the products section of the biographical sketch that include multiple authors may, at their discretion, choose to list one or more of the authors and then et al in lieu of including the complete listing of authors names. 6 Synergistic Activities Provide a list of up to five distinct examples that demonstrates the broader impact of the individual s professional and scholarly activities that focus on the integration and transfer of knowledge as well as its creation. Examples may include, among others innovations in teaching and training contributions to the science of learning development and or refinement of research tools computation methodologies and algorithms for problem solving development of databases to support research and education broadening the participation of groups underrepresented in STEM participation in international research collaborations participation in international standards development efforts and service to the scientific and engineering community outside of the individual s immediate organization. Synergistic activities must be specific and must not include multiple examples to further describe the activity. Examples with multiple components, such as committee member lists, sub bulleted highlights of honors and prizes, or a listing of organizations for which the individual has served as a reviewer, are not permitted. 7 Certification When the individual signs the certification on behalf of themselves, they are certifying that the information is current, accurate, and complete. This includes, but is not limited to, information related to domestic and foreign appointments and positions. Misrepresentations and or omissions may be subject to prosecution and liability pursuant to, but not limited to, 18 U.S.C. 287, 1001, 1031 and 31 U.S.C. 3729 3733 and 3802.  Proposal Award Policies Procedures Guide II 26 NSF 23 1 b Other Personnel For the personnel categories listed below, the proposal also may include information on exceptional qualifications that merit consideration in the evaluation of the proposal. While the requirement to use SciENcv for preparation and submission of the biographical sketch is for any individual designated as senior personnel, the biographical information for other personnel may be freeform. The biographical information must be clearly identified as Other Personnel biographical information and uploaded as a single PDF file in the Other Supplementary Documents section of the proposal. 1 Postdoctoral associates 2 Other professionals 3 Students research assistants c Equipment Proposals For equipment proposals, the following must be provided for each auxiliary user 1 Short biographical sketch and 2 List of up to five publications most closely related to the proposed acquisition. Such information should be clearly identified as Equipment Proposal biographical information and uploaded as a single PDF file in the Other Supplementary Documents section of the proposal. ii Current and Pending Other Support Note The mandate to use SciENcv only for the preparation of current and pending other support information will go into effect for new proposals submitted or due on or after October 23, 2023. In the interim, proposers may continue to prepare and submit this document via use of SciENcv or the NSF fillable PDF. NSF, however, encourages the community to use SciENcv prior to the October 2023 implementation. a Current and pending other support30 information is used to assess the capacity of the individual to carry out the research as proposed and helps assess any potential scientific and budgetary overlap duplication, as well as overcommitment with the project being proposed. Note that there is no page limitation for this section of the proposal, though some fields have character limitations for consistency and equity. b Senior personnel include the individuals designated by the proposer awardee organization and approved by NSF who contribute in a substantive, meaningful way to the scientific development or execution of a research and development project proposed to be carried out with a research and development award.31 30 According to 42 U.S.C 6605, current and pending support A means all resources made available, or expected to be made available, to an individual in support of the individual s research and development efforts, regardless of i whether the source of the resource is foreign or domestic ii whether the resource is made available through the entity applying for a research and development award or directly to the individual or iii whether the resource has monetary value and B includes in kind contributions requiring a commitment of time and directly supporting the individual s research and development efforts, such as the provision of office or laboratory space, equipment, supplies, employees, or students. 31 In accordance with the NSPM 33 Implementation Guidance, senior personnel typically do not include graduate students.  Proposal Award Policies Procedures Guide II 27 NSF 23 1 c Current and pending other support must be provided separately for each individual designated as senior personnel through use of SciENcv. SciENcv will produce an NSF compliant PDF version of the current and pending other support. Senior personnel must prepare, save, certify, and submit these documents as part of their proposal via Research.gov or Grants.gov. d Consistent with NSPM 33, senior personnel are required to disclose contracts associated with participation in programs sponsored by foreign governments, instrumentalities, or entities, including foreign government sponsored talent recruitment programs32. Further, if an individual receives direct or indirect support that is funded by a foreign government sponsored talent recruitment program, even where the support is provided through an intermediary and does not require membership in the foreign government sponsored talent recruitment program, that support must be disclosed. Senior personnel must also report other foreign government sponsored or affiliated activity. Note that non disclosure clauses associated with these contracts are not acceptable exemptions from this disclosure requirement. e A table entitled, NSPM 33 Implementation Guidance Pre and Post award Disclosures Relating to the Biographical Sketch and Current and Pending Other Support33 has been created to provide helpful reference information regarding pre award and post award disclosures. The table includes the types of activities to be reported, where such activities must be reported in the proposal, as well as when updates are required in the proposal and award lifecycle. A final column identifies activities that are not required to be reported. f Do not submit any personal information in the current and pending other support. This includes items such as home address home telephone, fax, or cell phone numbers home e mail address driver s license number marital status personal hobbies and the like. Such personal information is not appropriate for current and pending other support and is not relevant to the merits of the proposal. NSF is not responsible or in any way liable for the release of such material. g A separate submission must be provided for each active project pending proposal as well as in kind contributions using the format specified below. The formats of current and pending other support are as follows required i Identifying Information Name Enter the name of the senior person Last name, First name, Middle name, including any applicable suffix . 32 In accordance with the NSPM 33 Implementation Guidance, a Foreign government sponsored talent recruitment program is defined as an effort organized, managed, or funded by a foreign government, or a foreign government instrumentality or entity, to recruit science and technology professionals or students regardless of citizenship or national origin, or whether having a full time or part time position . Some foreign government sponsored talent recruitment programs operate with the intent to import or otherwise acquire from abroad, sometimes through illicit means, proprietary technology or software, unpublished data and methods, and intellectual property to further the military modernization goals and or economic goals of a foreign government. Many, but not all, programs aim to incentivize the targeted individual to relocate physically to the foreign state for the above purpose. Some programs allow for or encourage continued employment at United States research facilities or receipt of Federal research funds while concurrently working at and or receiving compensation from a foreign institution, and some direct participants not to disclose their participation to United States entities. Compensation could take many forms including cash, research funding, complimentary foreign travel, honorific titles, career advancement opportunities, promised future compensation, or other types of remuneration or consideration, including in kind compensation. 33 This table supersedes in its entirety, Table 2a and Paragraph 7 of the Disclosure Requirements and Standardization Section of the NSPM 33 Implementation Guidance.  Proposal Award Policies Procedures Guide II 28 NSF 23 1 ORCID ID34 Optional Enter the ORCID ID of the senior person. Position Title Enter the current position title of the senior person. ii Organization and Location Name Enter the name of the primary organization of the senior person. Location Enter the City, State Province, and Country where the primary organization is located. If the State Province is not applicable, enter N A. iii Projects Proposals In this section, disclose ALL existing projects, as well as all projects currently under consideration for funding, in accordance with the definitions for current and pending below. Unless otherwise specified, there is no page or character limit. Project Proposal Title Enter the title of each project proposal being reported. Status of Support Select the appropriate status type as defined below Current all ongoing projects, or projects with ongoing obligations, from whatever source irrespective of whether such support is provided through the proposing organization or is provided directly to the individual. Pending any proposal currently under consideration for funding including this proposal from whatever source irrespective of whether such support is provided through the proposing organization or is provided directly to the individual. Proposal Award Number if available Enter the applicable proposal award number for each proposal and or award, if available. Source of Support Identify the entity for each proposal and or award that is providing the support. Include all Federal, State, Tribal, territorial, local, foreign, public, or private foundations, non profit organizations, industrial or other commercial organizations, or internal funds allocated toward specific projects. Primary Place of Performance Identify the primary location where the project or activity is being executed. Enter the City, State Province, and Country where the organization is located. If the State Province is not applicable, enter N A. Indicate virtual if the project is not based in a physical location. Project Proposal Start Date Indicate the start date MM YYYY of the project activity as proposed approved. Project Proposal End Date Indicate the end date MM YYYY of the project activity as proposed approved. Total Award Amount Enter the total award amount for the entire period of performance, including indirect costs, rounded to the nearest dollar. If the support is in a foreign country s currency, convert to U.S. dollars at time of submission. Person Month s or Partial Person Months Per Year Committed to the Project Enter how much time the individual anticipates is necessary to complete the scope of work on the proposed project or award. Enter the number of person months even if unsalaried for the current budget period and enter the proposed person months for each subsequent budget period. If the individual is reporting person months that span 34 See for information on obtaining an ORCID ID.  Proposal Award Policies Procedures Guide II 29 NSF 23 1 two calendar years, the individual should enter the latter year. For example, if the entry covers the organization s fiscal year of June 2023 through May 2024, the individual would enter 2024 for the year and include the corresponding person months as defined and used by the organization in proposals submitted to NSF. If the time commitment is not readily ascertainable, reasonable estimates should be provided. Overall Objectives Provide a brief statement of the overall objectives of the proposal award. This field is limited to 1500 characters. Statement of Potential Overlap Provide a description of the potential overlap with any pending proposal or award and this proposal in terms of scope, budget, or person months planned or committed to the project by the individual. If there is no potential overlap, enter N A in this field. iv In Kind Contributions In this section, disclose ALL35 in kind contributions related to current and pending support. In kind contributions include, but are not limited to, office laboratory space, equipment, supplies, and employee or student resources. Status of Support Select the appropriate status type as defined below Current all in kind contributions obligated from whatever source irrespective of whether such support is provided through the proposing organization or is provided directly to the individual. Pending all in kind contributions currently under consideration from whatever source irrespective of whether such support is provided through the proposing organization or is provided directly to the individual. In Kind Contribution Start Date Indicate the start date MM YYYY of the in kind contribution as proposed approved. In Kind Contribution End Date Indicate the end date MM YYYY of the in kind contribution as proposed approved. Source of Support Identify the entity ies that is are providing the in kind contribution. Include, for example, Federal, State, Tribal, territorial, local, foreign, public, or private foundations, non profit organizations, industrial or other commercial organizations, or internal funds allocated toward specific projects. Summary of In Kind Contribution s Provide a summary of the in kind contribution s not intended for use on the project proposal being proposed to NSF, whether or not it has an associated time commitment. If the time commitment or dollar value is not readily ascertainable, reasonable estimates should be provided. Person Month s or Partial Person Months Per Year Associated with the In kind Contribution Enter how much time the individual anticipates is necessary to complete the scope of work associated with the in kind contribution. Enter the number of person months even if unsalaried for the current budget period and enter the proposed person months for each subsequent budget period. If the individual is reporting person months that span two calendar years, the individual should enter the latter year. For example, if the entry covers the organization s fiscal year of June 2023 through May 2024, the individual would enter 2024 for the year and include the corresponding person months as defined and used by the organization in proposals submitted to NSF. If the time commitment is not readily ascertainable, reasonable estimates should be provided. 35 See the table entitled, NSPM 33 Implementation Guidance Pre and Post award Disclosures Relating to the Biographical Sketch and Current and Pending Other Support for instructions on in kind support for use on the project being proposed.  Proposal Award Policies Procedures Guide II 30 NSF 23 1 U.S. Dollar Value of In Kind Contribution Enter the U.S. dollar value of the in kind contribution. If the dollar value is not readily ascertainable, reasonable estimates should be provided. If the support is in a foreign country s currency, convert to U.S. dollars at time of submission, rounded to the nearest dollar. Overall Objectives Provide a brief statement of the overall objectives of the in kind contribution s . This field is limited to 1500 characters. Statement of Potential Overlap Provide a description of the potential overlap with any current or pending in kind contribution and this proposal in terms of scope, budget, or person months planned or committed to the project by the individual. If there is no overlap, then enter N A in the field. v Certification When the individual signs the certification on behalf of themselves, they are certifying that the information is current, accurate, and complete. This includes, but is not limited to, information related to current, pending, and other support both foreign and domestic as defined in 42 U.S.C. 6605. Misrepresentations and or omissions may be subject to prosecution and liability pursuant to, but not limited to, 18 U.S.C. 287, 1001, 1031 and 31 U.S.C. 3729 3733 and 3802. h The individual also must report any proposal, other than the proposal currently being submitted, that will likely be submitted imminently or in the near future. i Prior to making a funding recommendation, the cognizant NSF program officer will request that an updated version of current and pending other support be submitted via Research.gov. iii Collaborators Other Affiliations Information Single Copy Document See Chapter II.D.1 for additional information on Single Copy Documents. The following information regarding collaborators and other affiliations COA must be separately provided for each individual identified as senior personnel on the project. The COA information must be provided through use of the COA template. The information in the tables is not required to be sorted, alphabetically or otherwise. Refer to the frequently asked questions on the COA template page for additional information. There are five separate categories of information which correspond to the five tables in the COA template COA template Table 1 List the individual s last name, first name, middle initial, and organizational affiliation in the last 12 months. COA template Table 2 List names as last name, first name, middle initial, for whom a personal, family, or business relationship would otherwise preclude their service as a reviewer. In the Type of Relationship column please specify the personal, family, or business relationship involved. COA template Table 3 List names as last name, first name, middle initial, and provide organizational affiliations, if known, for the following The individual s Ph.D. advisors and All of the individual s Ph.D. thesis advisees.  Proposal Award Policies Procedures Guide II 31 NSF 23 1 COA template Table 4 List names as last name, first name, middle initial, and provide organizational affiliations, if known, for the following Co authors on any book, article, report, abstract or paper with collaboration in the last 48 months publication date may be later and Collaborators on projects, such as funded awards, graduate research, or others in the last 48 months. COA template Table 5 List editorial board, editor in chief, and co editors with whom the individual interacts. An editor in chief must list the entire editorial board. Editorial Board 36 List name s of editor in chief and journal in the past 24 months and Other co Editors of journal or collections with whom the individual has directly interacted in the last 24 months. The template has been developed to be fillable, however, the content and format requirements must not be altered by the user. When completing the template, do not change the column sizes or the font type. The instructions at the top of the template may be deleted, and rows may be inserted as needed to provide additional names37. This information is used to manage reviewer selection. See Exhibit II 2 for additional information on potential reviewer conflicts. i. Special Information and Supplementary Documentation Except as specified below, Special Information and Supplementary Documentation must be included as part of the Project Description or part of the Budget Justification , if it is relevant to determining the quality of the proposed work. Information submitted in the following areas is not considered part of the 15 page Project Description limitation. This Special Information and Supplementary Documentation section also is not considered an appendix. Specific guidance on the need for additional documentation may be obtained from the organization s SPO or in the references cited below. i Postdoctoral Researcher Mentoring Plan. Each proposal38 that requests funding to support postdoctoral researchers39 must upload under Mentoring Plan in the supplementary documentation section of Research.gov, a description of the mentoring activities that will be provided for such individuals. In no more than one page, the mentoring plan must describe the mentoring that will be provided to all postdoctoral researchers supported by the project, regardless of whether they reside at the submitting 36 Editorial board does not include Editorial Advisory Board, Scientific Editorial Board, or any other subcategory of Editorial Board. It is limited to those individuals who perform editing duties or manage the editing process i.e., editor in chief . 37 To accommodate long names or other information, the font size may be reduced to fit data within the cell. 38 For purposes of meeting the mentoring requirement, simultaneously submitted collaborative proposals, and collaborative proposals that include subawards, constitute a single unified project. Therefore, only one mentoring plan must be submitted for the entire project. 39 In situations where a postdoctoral researcher is listed in Section A of the NSF Budget, and is functioning in a Senior Personnel capacity i.e., responsible for the scientific or technical direction of the project , a mentoring plan is not required.  Proposal Award Policies Procedures Guide II 32 NSF 23 1 organization, any subrecipient organization, or at any organization participating in a simultaneously submitted collaborative proposal. Proposers are advised that the mentoring plan must not be used to circumvent the 15 page Project Description limitation. See Chapter II.E.3 for additional information on collaborative proposals. Mentoring activities provided to postdoctoral researchers supported on the project will be evaluated under the Broader Impacts review criterion. Examples of mentoring activities include but are not limited to career counseling training in preparation of proposals, publications and presentations guidance on ways to improve teaching and mentoring skills guidance on how to effectively collaborate with researchers from diverse backgrounds and disciplinary areas and training in responsible professional practices. ii Plans for Data Management and Sharing of the Products of Research. Proposals must include a document of no more than two pages uploaded under Data Management Plan in the supplementary documentation section of Research.gov. This supplementary document should describe how the proposal will conform to NSF policy on the dissemination and sharing of research results see Chapter XI.D.4 , and may include 1. the types of data, samples, physical collections, software, curriculum materials, and other materials to be produced in the course of the project 2. the standards to be used for data and metadata format and content where existing standards are absent or deemed inadequate, this should be documented along with any proposed solutions or remedies 3. policies for access and sharing including provisions for appropriate protection of privacy, confidentiality, security, intellectual property, or other rights or requirements 4. policies and provisions for re use, re distribution, and the production of derivatives and 5. plans for archiving data, samples, and other research products, and for preservation of access to them. Data management requirements and plans specific to the Directorate, Office, Division, Program, or other NSF unit, relevant to a proposal are available on the NSF website If guidance specific to the program is not available, then the requirements established in this section apply. Simultaneously submitted collaborative proposals and proposals that include subawards are a single unified project and should include only one supplemental combined Data Management Plan, regardless of the number of non lead collaborative proposals or subawards included. In such collaborative proposals, the data management plan should discuss the relevant data issues in the context of the collaboration. A valid Data Management Plan may include only the statement that no detailed plan is needed, as long as the statement is accompanied by a clear justification. Proposers who feel that the plan cannot fit within the limit of two pages may use part of the 15 page Project Description for additional data management information. Proposers are advised that the Data Management Plan must not be used to circumvent the 15 page Project Description limitation. The Data Management Plan will be reviewed as an integral part of the proposal, considered under Intellectual Merit or Broader Impacts or both, as appropriate for the scientific community of relevance. iii Rationale for Performance of All or Part of the Project Off campus or Away from Organizational Headquarters. iv Documentation of Collaborative Arrangements of Significance to the Proposal through . See Chapter II.D.2.d. iv . Letters of collaboration should be limited to stating the intent to collaborate and should not contain endorsements or evaluation of the proposed project. While not required, the following format may be used in preparation of letters of collaboration  Proposal Award Policies Procedures Guide II 33 NSF 23 1 If the proposal submitted by Dr. insert the full name of the Principal Investigator entitled insert the proposal title is selected for funding by NSF, it is my intent to collaborate and or commit resources as detailed in the Project Description or the Facilities, Equipment and Other Resources section of the proposal. While letters of collaboration are permitted, unless required by a specific program solicitation, letters of support should not be submitted as they are not a standard component of an NSF proposal. A letter of support is typically from a key stakeholder such as an organization, collaborator, or Congressional Representative, and is used to convey a sense of enthusiasm for the project and or to highlight the qualifications of the PI or co PI. A letter of support submitted in response to a program solicitation requirement must be unique to the specific proposal submitted and cannot be altered without the author s explicit prior approval. Proposals that contain letters of support not authorized by the program solicitation may be returned without review. v In order for NSF to comply with Federal Environmental Statutes including, but not limited to, the National Environmental Policy Act 42 USC 4321, et seq. , the National Historic Preservation Act 54 USC 306108 previously codified at 16 USC 470, et seq. , and the Endangered Species Act 16 USC 1531, et seq. , the proposer may be requested to submit supplemental post proposal submission information to NSF in order that a reasonable and accurate assessment of environmental impacts by NSF may be made. Supplemental information also may be requested to assist NSF in complying with Executive Orders and Presidential memoranda directing Federal agencies to carry out their obligations to engage in Tribal consultation when Tribal interests may be impacted. The types of information that may be requested is shown in the Organization Environmental Impacts Checklist. vi Antarctic Proposals to any NSF program require Logistical Requirements and Field Plan supplementary documents to be submitted with the proposal. See proposal with fieldwork in Chapter V.A of the Antarctic Research solicitation. Special budgetary considerations also apply. See also Chapter V.B of the Antarctic Research solicitation. vii Research in a Location Designated, or Eligible to be Designated, a Registered Historic Place. See Chapter XI.J . Where applicable, the box for Historic Places must be checked on the Cover Sheet. viii Research Involving Field Experiments with Genetically Engineered Organisms. See Chapter XI.B.2 ix Documentation Regarding Research Involving the Use of Human Subjects, Hazardous Materials, Live Vertebrate Animals, or Endangered Species. See Chapter II.E.4, Chapter II.E.5, and Chapter XI.B . x Special Components in New Proposals or in Requests for Supplemental Funding. This includes, for example, Facilitation Awards for Scientists and Engineers with Disabilities FASED , Research Opportunity Awards ROAs , Research Experiences for Undergraduates REUs , Facilitating Research at Primarily Undergraduate Institutions RUIs , Research Experiences for Veterans REV , and Research Experiences for Teachers, and Research Experiences for Graduates. See Chapter II.F.7 for information on FASED, and, for the other programs identified, consult the relevant solicitation or Dear Colleague Letter. In addition, the supplementary documentation section should alert NSF officials to unusual circumstances that require special handling, including, for example, proprietary or other privileged information in the proposal, matters affecting individual privacy, required intergovernmental review under E.O. 12372 Intergovernmental Review of Federal Programs for activities that directly affect State or local governments, or possible national security implications.  Proposal Award Policies Procedures Guide II 34 NSF 23 1 E. Special Processing Instructions 1. Proprietary or Privileged Information Patentable ideas, trade secrets, privileged or confidential commercial or financial information, disclosure of which may harm the proposer, should be included in proposals only when such information is necessary to convey an understanding of the proposed project. Such information must be clearly marked in the proposal and be appropriately labeled with a legend such as, The following is proprietary or confidential information that name of proposing organization requests not be released to persons outside the Government, except for purposes of review and evaluation. Such information also may be included as a separate statement. If this method is used, the statement must be submitted as a single copy document in the Proposal Preparation Module in Research.gov. See also Chapter II.D.1 for further information regarding submission of single copy documents. 40 The box for Proprietary or Privileged Information must be checked on the Cover Sheet when the proposal contains such information. While NSF will make every effort to prevent unauthorized access to such material, the Foundation is not responsible or in any way liable for the release of such material. 2. Beginning Investigators applies to proposals submitted to the Biological Sciences Directorate only Research proposals to the Biological Sciences Directorate ONLY not proposals for conferences cannot be duplicates of proposals to any other Federal agency for simultaneous consideration. The only exceptions to this rule are 1 when the Program Officers at the relevant Federal agencies have previously agreed to joint review and possible joint funding of the proposal or 2 proposals for PIs who are beginning investigators individuals who have not been a PI or co PI on a Federally funded award with the exception of doctoral dissertation, postdoctoral fellowship or research planning grants . For proposers who qualify under this latter exception, the box for Beginning Investigator must be checked on the Cover Sheet. 3. Collaborative Proposals A collaborative proposal is one in which investigators from two or more organizations wish to collaborate on a unified research project. Collaborative proposals may be submitted to NSF in one of two methods as a single proposal, in which a single award is being requested with subawards administered by the lead organization or by simultaneous submission of proposals from different organizations, with each organization requesting a separate award. In either case, the lead organization s proposal must contain all of the requisite sections as a single package to be provided to reviewers that will happen automatically when procedures below are followed . All collaborative proposals must clearly describe the roles to be played by the other organizations, specify the managerial arrangements, and explain the advantages of the multi organizational effort within the Project Description. a. Submission of a collaborative proposal from one organization The single proposal method allows investigators from two or more organizations who have developed an integrated research project to submit a single, focused proposal. A single investigator bears primary responsibility for the administration of the award and discussions with NSF, and, at the discretion of the organizations involved, investigators from any of the participating organizations may be designated as co PIs. Note, however, that if awarded, a single award would be made to the submitting organization, with any collaborators listed as subawards. See Chapter II.D.2.f vi e for additional instructions on preparation of this type of proposal. 40 Detailed instructions for submission of proprietary or privileged information are available in Research.gov.  Proposal Award Policies Procedures Guide II 35 NSF 23 1 If a proposed subaward includes funding to support postdoctoral researchers, the mentoring activities to be provided for such individuals must be incorporated in the supplemental mentoring plan outlined in Chapter II.D.2.i i . b. Submission of a collaborative proposal from multiple organizations Simultaneous submission of proposals allows multiple organizations to submit a unified set of certain proposal sections, as well as information unique to each organization as specified below. All collaborative proposals arranged as separate submissions from multiple organizations must be submitted via Research.gov. For these proposals, the project title must begin with the words Collaborative Research If funded, each organization bears responsibility for a separate award. Required sections of the proposal differ based on the organization s role. The following sections are required for a collaborative proposal submitted by Lead Organization Non Lead Organization Cover Sheet Cover Sheet Project Summary Table of Contents automatically generated Table of Contents automatically generated Biographical Sketch es Project Description Budget and Budget Justification References Cited Current and Pending Support Biographical Sketch es Facilities, Equipment and Other Resources Budget and Budget Justification Collaborators Other Affiliations Information Current and Pending Support Facilities, Equipment and Other Resources Data Management Plan Postdoctoral Mentoring Plan if applicable Collaborators Other Affiliations Information See Chapter II.D.2.i for additional guidance on the mentoring and data management plan requirements for collaborative proposals. NSF will combine the proposal submission for printing or electronic viewing. To submit the collaborative proposal, the following process must be completed 41 i Each non lead organization must assign their proposal a proposal PIN. This proposal PIN and the temporary proposal ID generated by Research.gov when the non lead proposal is created must be provided to the lead organization before the lead organization submits its proposal to NSF. ii The lead organization must then enter each non lead organization s proposal PIN and temporary proposal ID into the Research.gov lead proposal by using the Link Collaborative Proposals option found on the Form Preparation screen. 41 Detailed instructions for the preparation and submission of collaborative proposals are available in Research.gov.  Proposal Award Policies Procedures Guide II 36 NSF 23 1 iii All components of the collaborative proposal must meet any established deadline date, and failure to do so may result in the entire collaborative proposal being returned without review. iv Each collaborative proposal that includes funding to an International Branch Campus of a U.S. IHE or to a foreign organization or foreign individual including through use of a subaward or consultant arrangement , must check the appropriate box on the proposal cover sheet. The requirement to check the box only applies to the proposing organization that includes the international component. The lead organization also must provide the requisite explanation justification in the project description. See Chapter I.E. for additional information on the content requirements. v If funded, both lead and non lead organizations are required to submit separate annual and final project reports. These reports should reference the work of the collaborative, while focusing on the distinct work conducted at each funded organization. 4. Proposals Involving Live Vertebrate Animals a. Any project proposing use of live vertebrate animals for research or education shall comply with the Animal Welfare Act 7 USC 2131, et seq. and the regulations promulgated thereunder by the Secretary of Agriculture 9 CFR 1.1 4.11 pertaining to the humane care, handling, and treatment of live vertebrate animals held or used for research, teaching, or other activities supported by Federal awards. In accordance with these requirements, proposed projects involving use of any live vertebrate animal for research or education must be approved by the submitting organization s Institutional Animal Care and Use Committee IACUC before an award can be made. For this approval to be accepted by NSF, the organization must have a current Public Health Service PHS Approved Assurance. See also Chapter XI.B.3 for additional information on the administration of awards that utilize live vertebrate animals. Note that for some types of live vertebrate animals, additional review may be required. Any project proposing use of live vertebrate animals for research or education must comply with the provision in the PHS Assurance for Institutional Commitment Section II that requires the submitting organization to establish and maintain a program for activities involving animals in accordance with the Guide for the Care and Use of Laboratory Animals Guide . Taxon specific guidelines may be used as supplemental references.42 Departures from the Guide must be approved by the IACUC and based on scientific, veterinary, medical, or animal welfare issues for more information, see Office of Laboratory Animal Welfare OLAW Departures from the Guide . b. Sufficient information must be provided within the 15 page Project Description to enable reviewers to evaluate the i rationale for involving animals ii choice of species and number of animals to be used iii description of the proposed use of the animals iv exposure of animals to discomfort, pain, or injury and v description of any euthanasia methods to be used. c. Research facilities subject to the Animal Welfare Act using or intending to use live animals in research and who receive Federal funding are required to register the facility with the Animal and Plant Health Inspection Service APHIS , US Department of Agriculture. A current listing of licensed animal 42 Guidelines to the use of Wild Birds in Research Guidelines of the American Society of Mammologists for the Use of Wild Mammals in Research Guidelines for the Use of Fishes in Research and Guidelines for the Use of Live Amphibians and Reptiles in Field and Laboratory Research.  Proposal Award Policies Procedures Guide II 37 NSF 23 1 dealers also may be obtained from APHIS. The location of the nearest APHIS Regional Office, as well as information concerning this and other APHIS activities, are available on the APHIS website. d. Projects involving the care or use of live vertebrate animals at an international organization or international field site also require approval of research protocols by the U.S. recipient s IACUC. If the project is to be funded through an award to an international organization or through an individual fellowship award that will support activities at an international organization, NSF will require a statement from the international organization explicitly listing the proposer s name and referencing the title of the award to confirm that the activities will be conducted in accordance with all applicable laws in the international country and that the International Guiding Principles for Biomedical Research Involving Animals will be followed. e. The following information regarding the organization s intention to utilize live vertebrate animals as part of the project should be provided on the Cover Sheet i The box for Live Vertebrate Animals must be checked on the Cover Sheet if care and use of live vertebrate animals is envisioned. ii The date of IACUC approval of the animal use protocol covering the proposed work, if such approval has been granted prior to proposal submission, must be identified in the space provided. If IACUC approval has not been obtained prior to submission, the proposer should indicate Pending in the space provided for the approval date. If a decision is made to fund the proposal, the organization must provide a copy of the approval letter from the IACUC. The approval letter must affirm that an animal use protocol covering the proposed activities has been approved and should explicitly list the organization s PHS Animal Welfare Assurance Number, the proposer s name, the title and number of the NSF proposal, and the date of IACUC approval, as well as show an organizational signature. The approval letter must be provided to the cognizant NSF Program Officer before an award can be issued. iii The PHS approved Animal Welfare Assurance Number must be entered in the space provided. If a PHS Animal Welfare Assurance has not been obtained prior to submission, the proposer should indicate Pending in the space provided for the PHS Animal Welfare Assurance Number. If a decision is made to fund the proposal, the cognizant NSF Program Officer will notify the NSF Animal Welfare Officer to initiate negotiation of a PHS approved Animal Welfare Assurance with OLAW. A PHS Animal Welfare Assurance must be approved by OLAW before an award can be issued. f. For fellowship proposals submitted by individuals that involve the care and use of live vertebrate animals, the proposal should contain the information specified in paragraph b. above. In addition, a copy of the approval letter from the IACUC of the organization that provides oversight of the proposed work should be included as an Other Supplementary Document in Research.gov. The approval letter must affirm that an animal use protocol covering the proposed activities has been approved and should explicitly list the organization s PHS Animal Welfare Assurance Number, the proposer s name, the title and number of the NSF proposal, and the date of IACUC approval, as well as show an organizational signature. If IACUC approval has not been obtained prior to submission, the individual should indicate Pending in the space provided for the approval date. If a decision is made to fund the proposal, the individual must provide a signed copy of the official IACUC approval letter which includes the items specified above to the cognizant NSF Program Officer before an award can be issued. See also Chapter XI.B.3 for additional information on the administration of awards that include use of live vertebrate animals. 5. Proposals Involving Human Subjects a. Projects involving research with human subjects must ensure that subjects are protected from research risks in conformance with the relevant Federal policy known as the Common Rule Federal Policy for the Protection of Human Subjects, 45 CFR 690 . All projects involving human subjects must either have 1 approval from an Institutional Review Board IRB or, 2 an IRB determination that the project is  Proposal Award Policies Procedures Guide II 38 NSF 23 1 exempt from review, in accordance with the applicable subsection, as established in 45 CFR 690.104 d of the Common Rule. If certification of exemption is provided after submission of the proposal and before the award is issued, the exemption number corresponding to one or more of the exemption categories also must be included in the documentation provided to NSF. NSF cannot accept any IRB document that requires continued monitoring of the award activities involving human subjects by NSF. For projects lacking definite plans for the use of human subjects, their data, or their specimens, pursuant to 45 CFR 690.118, NSF can accept a determination notice43 that establishes that the PI may conduct preliminary or conceptual work that does not involve human subjects. Further instructions are provided in paragraph iv below. If the project involves human subjects and is to be performed outside of the U.S., evidence of IRB approval is required. If IRB approval is provided, and a Federal Wide Assurance FWA is not on file with the Department of Health and Human Services, Office for Human Research Protections OHRP , NSF may decline to support the project. Pursuant to 45 CFR 690.101 g , the Common Rule is not intended to supersede any additional protections that may be afforded to human subjects under foreign laws or regulations. OHRP maintains the International Compilation of Human Research Standards which contains a listing of over 1000 laws, regulations, and guidelines on human subjects protections in 130 countries and from many organizations. This site is an excellent resource regarding the conduct of human subjects research in an international setting. b. The following information regarding the organization s intention to use human subjects as part of the project should be provided on the Cover Sheet i The box for Human Subjects must be checked on the Cover Sheet if use of human subjects is envisioned. ii If human subject activities are exempt from IRB review, provide the exemption number s corresponding to one or more of the exemption categories. The eight categories of research that qualify for exemption from coverage by the regulations are defined in the Common Rule for Protection of Human Subjects. iii If the research is not designated as exempt, and has an approved, unexpired protocol at the time of submission, the IRB approval date should be identified in the space provided. If IRB approval has not been obtained at the time of submission, the proposer should indicate Pending in the space provided for the approval date. If a decision is made to fund the proposal, a signed copy of the IRB approval letter must be provided to the cognizant program prior to award. The letter should indicate approval of the proposed activities and must be submitted prior to an award being issued. iv If the project lacks definite plans regarding use of human subjects, their data or their specimens, pursuant to 45 CFR 690.118, the proposer must check the box for Human Subjects on the Cover Sheet and enter Pending in the space provided for the approval date. If available at the time of proposal submission, the determination notice should be uploaded as an Other Supplementary Document . If the determination notice is not available, and, the decision is made to fund the proposal, a determination notice must be provided to the cognizant program prior to award. NSF will be flexible with the form that this notice takes, as long as the written determination makes clear that no work with human subjects, including recruitment, will be conducted until full IRB approval is obtained. NSF will add a term and condition to the award that prevents any research involving human subjects from being carried out, or otherwise restricts the drawing down of funds, until IRB approval has been obtained. The PI may conduct preliminary or conceptual work that does not involve human subjects while the protocol is being developed or is under review, consistent with organizational guidelines. 43 An NSF approved format for submission of these determinations is available on the NSF website.  Proposal Award Policies Procedures Guide II 39 NSF 23 1 v The FWA Number that the proposer has on file with OHRP should be entered, if available. See also Chapter XI.B.1 for additional information on the administration of awards that include use of human subjects. 6. Potential Life Sciences Dual Use Research of Concern DURC a. Applicability This section applies to all research, for which NSF award funds may be used, that potentially falls within the scope of the U.S. Government Policy for Institutional Oversight of Life Sciences Dual Use Research of Concern as published in September, 2014, and or would fall under the Department of Health and Human Service s Framework for Guiding Decisions about Proposed Research Involving Enhanced Potential Pandemic Pathogens, as published in January 2017, hereafter referred to as the Policy . b. NSF Implementation of the Policy NSF is committed to preserving the benefits of life sciences research while minimizing the risk of misuse of the knowledge, information, products, or technologies provided by such research. The purpose of NSF s implementation of the Policy is to clarify proposer expectations about NSF funded research with certain high consequence pathogens and toxins with potential to be considered DURC or involve enhanced potential pandemic pathogens PPPs . Proposing organizations are responsible for identifying NSF funded life sciences proposals that could potentially be considered DURC or involve enhanced PPPs as defined in the Policy and for compliance with the requirements established in that Policy therein. The box for Potential Life Sciences Dual Use Research of Concern must be checked on the Cover Sheet if use of select agents or other enhanced potential pandemic pathogens, as defined by the Policy, are envisioned, and those agents or PPPs are used in ways that lead to enhancement of specific properties specified within the Policy. If a decision is made to fund the proposal, and use of a select agent as identified by the Policy is proposed, the proposer must submit evidence of registration of the select agent with the CDC or USDA as required by the Select Agent Regulations. In addition, the proposer must submit a justification demonstrating how the potential benefits of the research far outweigh the risks. The justification must be signed and certified by the Institutional Biosafety Committee or other appropriate Institutional Review Entity whose role includes review of research involving agents covered under the Policy before an award can be issued. NSF will not fund research that would be considered to lead to a gain of function of agents associated with the U.S. Government Policy on DURC See also Chapter XI.B.5 for additional information. NSF also will not fund research that involves the creation, transfer, or use of enhanced PPPs except under special circumstances where the potential benefits to society far outweigh the risks and all other conditions of the Policy are met. 7. Projects Requiring High Performance Computing Resources, Data Infrastructure, or Advanced Visualization Resources Many research projects require access to computational, data and or visualization resources in order to complete the work proposed. Typically, such resources will be described in the proposal under Facilities, Equipment and Other Resources. However, for those projects that require such resources at scales beyond what may be available locally, NSF supports a number of national resources. For the most computationally and or data intensive projects, the Frontera system at the Texas Advanced Computing Center TACC at the University of Texas at Austin is the most suitable. Frontera is designed to support research teams requiring the most advanced computational and data capabilities. The Office of Advanced Cyberinfrastructure within the Directorate for Computer and Information Science and Engineering oversees the allocation process for this system. Proposals are reviewed for both their scientific and  Proposal Award Policies Procedures Guide II 40 NSF 23 1 computational data needs, as well as their readiness to utilize the resource. The Frontera system is among the largest and most powerful supercomputers ever deployed at a U.S. IHE it offers over 16,000 processors, as well as significant other processing capabilities, to advance research that would not otherwise be possible. More information about the system and how researchers can request access can be found on the Frontera website. The National Center for Atmospheric Research NCAR provides high performance computing resources for NSF funded researchers in atmospheric and related sciences. To access these supercomputers, data storage systems, and other resources, users must apply for allocations through NCAR. Applications are reviewed, and time is allocated according to the needs of the projects and the availability of resources. More details on the allocations process can be found on the NCAR website. The intention to request use of these NSF supported national resources should be described in the Facilities, Equipment and Other Resources section of the proposal. No letter of support or collaboration is required. The most general set of large computational and data resources funded by NSF are accessible through the eXtreme Science and Engineering Discovery Environment XSEDE project. XSEDE provides the integrating fabric for a collection of very powerful supercomputers, a high throughput computing environment, high volume data storage facilities, and advanced visualization services, connected by a high bandwidth private network. Additionally, XSEDE offers an education and outreach program on how to use its services, and an extended collaborative support program to assist researchers in using the advanced computational resources. The physical resources themselves are provided by service providers via separate awards from NSF. Allocations of those resources for large projects are determined by the XSEDE Resource Allocation Committee, which meets quarterly, using an external set of experts. Smaller requests do not require a proposal or review, and a simple online process may be used to request such an allocation. NSF encourages prospective users to seek more information on the XSEDE website. For researchers requiring high throughput computing computing that is characterized by executing large numbers of tasks over a long period of time The Partnership to Advance Throughput Computing PATh makes Distributed High Throughput Computing dHTC capacity available to researchers through a fabric of services. These services enable the federation of resources into an effective source of computing capacity for a wide spectrum of science applications. PATh supports single PIs and collaborative science groups across science and engineering disciplines to join the cohort of international physical science collaborations who have leveraged the dHTC paradigm for decades. More information on accessing dHTC services and computing capacity can be found on the PATh website. 8. International Activities a. International Research Education Training Activities. For each proposal that describes an international activity, PIs should list the primary countries involved on the Cover Sheet. b. An international activity is defined as research, training, and or education carried out in cooperation with foreign counterparts either overseas or in the U.S. using virtual technologies. If the Funding of an International Branch Campus of a U.S. IHE, including through use of a subaward or consultant agreement box or Funding of a Foreign Organization, including through use of a subaward or consultant agreement box is checked on the Cover Sheet, the proposer also must enter the name of the applicable country ies in the International Activities Country Name s box es on the Cover Sheet. See also PAPPG Chapter I.E for additional information. c. International Conferences. Proposers also should enter on the Cover Sheet the country countries with which project participants will engage and or travel to attend international conferences. If the specific location of the international conference is not known at the time of the proposal submission, proposers should enter Worldwide on the Cover Sheet. d. Work in foreign countries. Some governments require nonresidents to obtain official approval to carry out investigations within their borders and coastal waters under their jurisdiction. PIs are responsible  Proposal Award Policies Procedures Guide II 41 NSF 23 1 for obtaining the required authorizations. Advance coordination should minimize disruption of the research. See Chapter XI.B.4. 9. Safe and Inclusive Working Environments for Off Campus or Off Site Research It is NSF policy see Chapter XI.A.1.g. to foster safe and harassment free environments wherever science is conducted. NSF s policy recognizes that a community effort is essential to eliminate sexual and other forms of harassment in science and to build inclusive scientific climates where people can learn, grow, and thrive. Accordingly, for each proposal that proposes to conduct research off campus or off site44, the AOR must complete a certification45 that the organization has a plan in place for that proposal that describes how the following types of behavior will be addressed a. Abuse of any person, including, but not limited to, harassment, stalking, bullying, or hazing of any kind, whether the behavior is carried out verbally, physically, electronically, or in written form or b. Conduct that is unwelcome, offensive, indecent, obscene, or disorderly. This plan should also identify steps the proposing organization will take to nurture an inclusive off campus or off site working environment, e.g., trainings processes to establish shared team definitions of roles, responsibilities, and culture, e.g., codes of conduct and field support, such as mentor mentee support mechanisms, regular check ins, and or developmental events Communications within team and to the organization should be considered in the plan, minimizing singular points within the communications pathway e.g., a single person overseeing access to a single satellite phone , and any special circumstances such as the involvement of multiple organizations or the presence of third parties in the working environment should be taken into account. The process or method for making incident reports as well as how any reports received will be resolved should also be accounted for. The organization s plan for the proposal must be disseminated to individuals participating in the off campus or off site research prior to departure. Proposers should not submit the plan to NSF for review. F. Other Types of Proposals In addition to standard research proposals that follow the proposal preparation instructions contained in sections A through D of this chapter, there are other types of proposals that may be submitted to NSF. Each of them is described below, along with instructions that may supplement or deviate from NSF s standard proposal preparation instructions specified in sections A through D of this chapter. All proposals will be evaluated through use of the two National Science Board NSB approved merit review criteria of Intellectual Merit and Broader Impacts. 1. Planning Proposal A planning proposal is a type of proposal used to support initial conceptualization, planning and collaboration activities that aim to formulate new and sound plans for large scale projects in emerging research areas for future submission to an NSF program. This type of proposal is not intended to provide seed funding for a proposal that has been declined, nor is it appropriate for preliminary research on efforts that are aligned with established research programs. Rather, planning proposals are appropriate for the development of larger scale proposals in specific areas in which NSF wishes to ensure a sufficiently robust competition in the future. These include areas in which NSF is initiating new funding opportunities assessment of infrastructure including cyberinfrastructure needs and or large scale research, infrastructure including cyberinfrastructure , or training efforts that require coordination of multi disciplinary 44For purposes of this requirement, off campus or off site research is defined as data information samples being collected off campus or off site, such as fieldwork and research activities on vessels and aircraft. 45 See also Chapter II.D.1.d viii .  Proposal Award Policies Procedures Guide II 42 NSF 23 1 approaches, expertise, and or organizations at regional scales. In these cases, NSF is especially interested in activities that would catalyze new collaborations that broaden the participation of individuals or organizations underrepresented in NSF award portfolios. PIs are advised that they must submit a concept outline prior to submission of a planning proposal. This will aid in determining the appropriateness of the work for consideration under this type of proposal. Concept outlines can be submitted either by email to a cognizant Program Officer or via the Program Suitability and Proposal Concept Tool ProSPCT . An NSF funding opportunity that includes planning proposals will provide specific guidance on submission of concept outlines using either email or the ProSPCT form. See Chapter I.D.1 for additional information on concept outlines. For concept outlines that must be submitted via ProSPCT, users must have a valid Login.gov account to access the tool. PIs will receive an email from the cognizant NSF program officer that specifies whether a full proposal may be submitted. The email confirming approval to submit a planning proposal must be uploaded by the prospective PI in the Program Officer Concurrence Email section of Research.gov. Planning proposals do not constitute any commitment on behalf of the PI co PI s or their organizations to submit a future proposal or carry out a research, education, or infrastructure project, nor do they imply an intent on the part of NSF to support a future proposed project beyond the planning grant. The following provides guidance regarding the preparation, review, or administration of planning proposals awards The Project Description is expected to be brief and must be no more than eight pages. It must include clear statements as to why this project is appropriate for planning proposal, including how the funds will be used to formulate a sound approach for future submission to an NSF program. Note this proposal preparation instruction deviates from the standard proposal preparation instructions contained in this Guide planning proposals must otherwise be compliant with the proposal preparation requirements specified in Part I of the PAPPG. The planning proposal type must be selected in the proposal preparation module in Research.gov. Only internal merit review is required for planning proposals. In some instances, Program Officers may elect to obtain external reviews to inform their decision. If external review is to be obtained, then the PI will be informed in the interest of maintaining the transparency of the review and recommendation process. Email documentation from at least one NSF Program Officer confirming approval to submit a planning proposal must be uploaded by the PI as a document entitled Planning Program Officer Concurrence Email in the Supplementary Documentation section of Research.gov. Requests may be for up to 100,000 per year including indirect costs and for up to two years in duration. The award size, however, will be consistent with the scope of the proposed planning activities and of a size comparable to planning grants in similar areas. Planning proposals are not eligible for reconsideration, if declined. See PAPPG Chapter IV.D.2.b. No cost extensions and requests for supplemental funding will be processed in accordance with standard NSF policies and procedures. NSF does not anticipate renewal of planning awards. However, renewed funding of a planning award may be requested only through submission of a Traditional or Accomplishment Based Renewal proposal that will be subject to full external merit review. See Chapter V for further information.  Proposal Award Policies Procedures Guide II 43 NSF 23 1 2. Rapid Response Research RAPID Proposal RAPID is a type of proposal used when there is a severe urgency with regard to availability of or access to, data, facilities or specialized equipment, including quick response research on natural or anthropogenic events and similar unanticipated occurrences. RAPID proposals are NOT for projects that are appropriate for submission as regular NSF proposals events that are unanticipated due to lack of awareness of timelines or collection of only non perishable data. PIs are advised that they must submit a concept outline prior to submission of a RAPID proposal. This will aid in determining the appropriateness of the work for consideration under this type of proposal. Concept outlines can be submitted either by email to a cognizant Program Officer or via ProSPCT. An NSF funding opportunity that includes RAPID proposals will provide specific guidance on submission of concept outlines using either email or via ProSPCT. See Chapter I.D.1 for additional information on concept outlines. For concept outlines that must be submitted via ProSPCT, users must have a valid Login.gov account to access the tool. The prospective PI will receive an email from the cognizant NSF program officer that specifies whether a full proposal may be submitted. The email confirming approval to submit a RAPID proposal must be uploaded by the prospective PI in the Program Officer Concurrence Email section of Research.gov. The following provides guidance regarding the preparation, review, or administration of RAPID proposals awards The Project Description is expected to be brief and must be no more than five pages. It must include clear statements as to why the proposed research is urgent and why RAPID is the most appropriate type of proposal for supporting the proposed work. Note this proposal preparation instruction deviates from the standard proposal preparation instructions contained in this Guide RAPID proposals must otherwise be compliant with the proposal preparation requirements specified in Part I of the PAPPG. The RAPID proposal type must be selected in the proposal preparation module in Research.gov. The project title will be preceded by the prefix RAPID Only internal merit review is required for RAPID proposals. In some instances, Program Officers may elect to obtain external reviews to inform their decision. If external review is to be obtained, then the PI will be informed in the interest of maintaining the transparency of the review and recommendation process. Email documentation from at least one NSF Program Officer confirming approval to submit a RAPID proposal must be uploaded by the PI as a document entitled RAPID Program Officer Concurrence Email in the Supplementary Documentation section of Research.gov. Requests may be for up to 200K including indirect costs and up to one year in duration. The award size, however, will be consistent with the project scope and of a size comparable to grants in similar areas. RAPID proposals are not eligible for reconsideration, if declined. See Chapter IV.D.2.b. No cost extensions and requests for supplemental funding will be processed in accordance with standard NSF policies and procedures. Renewed funding of RAPID awards may be requested only through submission of a Traditional or Accomplishment Based Renewal proposal that will be subject to full external merit review. See Chapter V for further information.  Proposal Award Policies Procedures Guide II 44 NSF 23 1 3. EArly concept Grants for Exploratory Research EAGER Proposal EAGER is a type of proposal used to support exploratory work in its early stages on untested, but potentially transformative, research ideas or approaches. This work may be considered especially high risk high payoff in the sense that it, for example, involves radically different approaches, applies new expertise, or engages novel disciplinary or interdisciplinary perspectives. These exploratory proposals also may be submitted directly to an NSF program, but the EAGER proposal type should not be used for projects that are appropriate for submission as regular i.e., non EAGER NSF proposals. EAGER proposals are NOT for projects that are appropriate for submission as regular NSF proposals for planning grants to support the collection of preliminary data or to provide services to NSF. PIs are advised that they must submit a concept outline prior to submission of a EAGER proposal. This will aid in determining the appropriateness of the work for consideration under this type of proposal. Concept outlines can be submitted either by email to a cognizant Program Officer or via ProSPCT. An NSF funding opportunity that includes EAGER proposals will provide specific guidance on submission of concept outlines using either email or via ProSPCT. See Chapter I.D.1 for additional information on concept outlines. For concept outlines that must be submitted via ProSPCT, users must have a valid Login.gov account to access the tool. The prospective PI will receive an email from the cognizant NSF program officer that specifies whether a full proposal may be submitted. The email confirming approval to submit an EAGER proposal must be uploaded by the prospective PI in the Program Officer Concurrence Email section of Research.gov. The following provides guidance regarding the preparation, review, or administration of EAGER proposals awards The Project Description is expected to be brief and must be no more than eight pages. It must include clear statements as to why this project is appropriate for EAGER funding, including why it does not fit into existing programs and why it is a good fit for EAGER. Note this proposal preparation instruction deviates from the standard proposal preparation instructions contained in this Guide EAGER proposals must otherwise be compliant with the proposal preparation requirements specified in Part I of the PAPPG. The EAGER proposal type must be selected in the proposal preparation module in Research.gov. The project title will be preceded by the prefix EAGER Only internal merit review is required for EAGER proposals. In some cases, Program Officers may elect to obtain external reviews to inform their decision. If external review is to be obtained, then the PI will be informed in the interest of maintaining the transparency of the review and recommendation process. Requests may be for up to 300K including indirect costs and up to two years in duration. The award size, however, will be consistent with the project scope and of a size comparable to grants in similar areas. EAGER proposals are not eligible for reconsideration, if declined. See Chapter IV.D.2.b.  Proposal Award Policies Procedures Guide II 45 NSF 23 1 No cost extensions and requests for supplemental funding will be processed in accordance with standard NSF policies and procedures. Renewed funding of an EAGER award may be requested only through submission of a Traditional or Accomplishment Based Renewal proposal that will be subject to full external merit review. See Chapter V for further information. 4. Research Advanced by Interdisciplinary Science and Engineering RAISE Proposal RAISE is a type of proposal that may be used to support bold, interdisciplinary projects whose Scientific advances lie in great part outside the scope of a single program or discipline, such that substantial funding support from more than one program or discipline is necessary. Lines of research promise transformational advances. Prospective discoveries reside at the interfaces of disciplinary boundaries that may not be recognized through traditional review or co review. To receive funding as a RAISE appropriate project, all three criteria must be met. RAISE is not intended to be used for projects that can be accommodated within other types of proposals or that continue well established practices. Prospective PIs are advised that they must submit a concept outline prior to submission of a RAISE proposal. This will aid in determining the appropriateness of the work for consideration under this type of proposal. Concept outlines can be submitted either by email to a cognizant Program Officer or via ProSPCT. An NSF funding opportunity that includes RAISE proposals will provide specific guidance on submission of concept outlines using either email or via ProSPCT. See Chapter I.D.1 for additional information on concept outlines. For concept outlines that must be submitted via ProSPCT, users must have a valid Login.gov account to access the tool. The prospective PIs will receive emails from the cognizant NSF program officers that specifies whether a full proposal may be submitted. Please note, this may be a single email message that identifies at least two NSF program officers who jointly considered the RAISE concept outline. The email s confirming approval to submit a RAISE proposal must be uploaded by the prospective PIs in the Program Officer Concurrence Email section of Research.gov. Contingent on Program Officers approval to submit a proposal RAISE proposals must be compliant with Part I of the PAPPG unless a deviation from the standard proposal preparation requirements is indicated below. NSF will not accept a RAISE separately submitted collaborative proposal from multiple organizations. A collaborative proposal must be submitted as a single proposal from one organization, with any collaborators identified as subawardee organizations. The RAISE proposal type must be selected in the proposal preparation module in Research.gov. The project title will be preceded by the prefix RAISE Requests may be for up to 1,000,000 including indirect costs and up to five years in duration. The award size and duration will be consistent with the project scope.  Proposal Award Policies Procedures Guide II 46 NSF 23 1 The proposal must explicitly address how the project is better suited for RAISE than for a regular NSF review process. Only internal merit review is required for RAISE proposals. Program Officers may elect to obtain external reviews to inform their decision. If external review is to be obtained, then the PI will be informed in the interest of maintaining the transparency of the review and recommendation process. The interdisciplinary and transformative potential of the project will be evaluated within the intellectual merit of the proposal. RAISE proposals are not eligible for reconsideration, if declined. See Chapter IV.D.2.b. No cost extensions and requests for supplemental funding will be processed in accordance with standard NSF policies and procedures. RAISE awards are not eligible for renewal. 5. Grant Opportunities for Academic Liaison with Industry GOALI Proposal GOALI is a type of proposal that seeks to stimulate collaboration between IHEs and industry. Under this proposal type, academic scientists, and engineers request funding either in conjunction with a regular proposal submitted to a standing NSF program, unsolicited proposal, or as a supplemental funding request to an existing NSF funded award. GOALI is not a separate program GOALI proposals must be submitted to an active NSF funding opportunity and must be submitted in accordance with the deadlines specified therein. A proposer interested in submitting a GOALI proposal or a GOALI supplemental funding request to an existing NSF funded award must contact the cognizant NSF Program Officer listed in the relevant funding opportunity prior to submission. Special interest is focused on affording opportunities for Interdisciplinary IHE industry teams to conduct collaborative research projects, in which the industry research participant provides critical research expertise, without which the likelihood for success of the project would be diminished Faculty, postdoctoral scholars, and students to conduct research and gain experience in an industrial setting and Industrial scientists and engineers to bring industry s perspective and integrative skills to academe. GOALI proposals should focus on research that addresses shared interests by academic researchers and industrial partners. The research should further scientific and engineering foundations to enable future breakthrough technologies with the potential to address critical industry needs. Industry involvement assures that the research is industrially relevant. PIs are expected to integrate their research objectives with educational and industrial needs. Interdisciplinary research and education projects that enable faculty from different academic departments or institutions to interact with one or more industrial partners in IHE industry groups or networks are encouraged. Proposals may include the participation of a third partner such as a National Laboratory or a non profit organization. NSF funding can be used for IHE research education activities and may support activities of faculty and their students and research associates in the industrial setting. NSF funds are not permitted to be used to support the industrial research partner except as noted below for small businesses. In addition to any program specific review criteria defined in the solicitation, reviewers may be asked to evaluate the degree and extent to which industry will be involved with the proposed research and the extent to which students and or post doctoral scholars will benefit from the interaction. The proposed research should be transformative, beneficial to industry, and further collaboration between the institution of higher education and industrial partners.  Proposal Award Policies Procedures Guide II 47 NSF 23 1 The industrial participant cannot use or receive any NSF funds on a GOALI award with the exception of small businesses that meet these requirements and are not currently funded NSF SBIR STTR recipients Must be a small business fewer than 500 employees located in the U.S At least 50 of the company s equity must be owned by U.S. citizens or permanent residents and All funded work must take place in the U.S. including work done by consultants and contractors . In addition to the above requirements, the size of the subaward to the small business partner must not exceed one third of the total award budget. The proposal must disclose any financial interest that the PI, co PI, Senior Personnel and or IHE have in the small business partner and identify appropriate mitigation of any financial conflict of interest. Review of GOALI proposals should assess the following aspects in addition to evaluating the Intellectual Merit and Broader Impacts of the proposal. What new knowledge generated by the proposed work could lead to innovations that can help address societal challenges What critical role do the partner s bring to the collaboration without which the proposed project cannot be successfully executed What is the anticipated longer term societal impact coming forth from the GOALI research project if successful What opportunities for industrial experience and training could the proposed GOALI project create for students postdoctoral scholars faculty Specific instructions for each type of request are provided below. a. Requests as part of a competitive proposal submission GOALI proposals must follow the deadlines applicable to an existing funding opportunity as well as the following GOALI specific requirements For GOALI collaborative proposals, the proposal must be submitted by a single organization with any collaborators listed as subawards. Collaborative proposals submitted through multiple organizations will not be accepted. See PAPPG Chapter II.E.3 for additional information. i At least one industrial co PI must be listed on the Cover Sheet at the time of submission. ii The IHE industry interaction should be described in the Project Description iii A GOALI Industrial PI Confirmation Letter from the industrial partner that confirms the participation of a co PI from industry must be submitted with the proposal if applicable, the letter also must state the degree of industrial participation as well as detail any support that the industry is providing to the institution of higher education . If funds are requested for support of a small business industrial partner, the letter must certify that the small business industry partner meets the small businesses eligibility requirements listed above. All GOALI related confirmation letters must be uploaded under GOALI Industrial PI Confirmation Letter in Research.gov. This supplementary documentation will not be counted towards the 15 page Project Description limitation and iv IHE and industrial partners should agree in advance as to how intellectual property IP rights will be handled. A signed IHE industry agreement on IP including publication and patent rights must be  Proposal Award Policies Procedures Guide II 48 NSF 23 1 submitted prior to issuance of an award. All such IP agreements must be consistent with federal law and terms and conditions of the award. NSF is responsible neither for the agreement reached nor the IP information exchanged between the institution of higher education and the industrial partner. b. Supplemental funding requests to existing NSF awards Supplemental funding requests to add GOALI elements to a currently funded NSF research project should be submitted by using the Supplemental Funding Request function in Research.gov. Such requests should include a brief description of the proposed activity, a budget and a budget justification, in addition to items ii iv above. At least one industrial participant must be included in the GOALI activity and must be specified in the GOALI Industrial PI Confirmation Letter. 6. Ideas Lab Proposal Ideas Lab is a type of proposal to support the development and implementation of creative and innovative project ideas that have the potential to transform research paradigms and or solve intractable problems. An Ideas Lab may be run independently, or in parallel, with the issuance of an NSF funding opportunity on the same topic. These project ideas typically will be high risk high impact, as they represent new and unproven ideas, approaches and or technologies. The Ideas Lab type of proposal is implemented using the four stage process described below a. Stage 1 Selection of Panelists There are two separate panels convened for an Ideas Lab a selection panel and an Ideas Lab panel. The role of the selection panel is to provide advice on the selection of participants. The role of the Ideas Lab panel is to provide an assessment of the project ideas developed during the Ideas Lab. The individuals selected to participate in each of these panels are subject matter experts for the specific topic of the Ideas Lab. All panelists are barred from receiving any research funding through, or in any other way collaborating on, the particular Ideas Lab in which they are involved. b. Stage 2 Selection of Participants A call for participants solicitation that describes the specific focus of the Ideas Lab will be issued. The solicitation will specify the content and submission instructions for such applications. The Project Description is limited to two pages and should include information regarding the applicant s specific expertise and interest in the topic area, as well as certain personal attributes that enhance the success of the Ideas Lab workshop e.g., experience and interest in working in teams, communication skills, level of creativity, willingness to take risks . Applicants also must include a Biographical Sketch and Current and Pending Support information both of which must be prepared in accordance with standard NSF formatting guidelines . All other elements of a full proposal are waived i.e., Project Summary, References Cited, Budget and Budget Justification, Facilities, Equipment and Other Resources . The application must be submitted as a preliminary proposal in Research.gov. No appendices or supplementary documents may be submitted. Applicants are notified electronically of NSF s decision regarding whether they are invited or not invited to participate in the Ideas Lab. Applicants will be informed about the context of the review and the criteria that were used to assess the applications in the form of a panel summary but will not receive individual reviews or other review related feedback.  Proposal Award Policies Procedures Guide II 49 NSF 23 1 c. Stage 3 Ideas Lab The agenda and duration46 of the Ideas Lab are communicated to meeting participants by the cognizant NSF Program Officer. Typically, anonymous real time peer review involving the participants and the Ideas Lab panel is incorporated into the workshop format, providing iterative constructive feedback during the development of project ideas. The Ideas Lab concept incorporates a guided creativity process, thus the use of a facilitator s is included, both to guide the creation of interdisciplinary teams and the creative development of ideas, and to ensure that the workshop progresses in a productive manner. At the end of the Ideas Lab, the Ideas Lab panel will provide a consensus report summarizing their evaluation of each project idea. The recommendations of the Ideas Lab panel are advisory to NSF. Within seven to fourteen calendar days following the Ideas Lab, the NSF Program Officers will determine which project ideas are meritorious and should be invited as full proposals. At the NSF Program Officers discretion subject to Division Director concurrence , they may invite none, some, or all of the project ideas as full proposals, with the final funding decision to occur after the full proposals have been received and reviewed. Invited full proposals which are prepared in accordance with standard research proposal formatting guidelines must be submitted within two months of receiving NSF notification after the Ideas Lab. d. Stage 4 Review and recommendation of full proposals Invited proposals will be reviewed internally by the cognizant NSF Program Officers, the Ideas Lab panelists, and other external reviewers, as appropriate. Resulting awards will be administered in accordance with standard NSF policies and procedures, including no cost extensions and supplemental funding requests. Renewed funding of an Ideas Lab award may be requested only through submission of a full proposal that will be subject to external merit review. Such proposals would be designated as an Ideas Lab renewal. 7. Facilitation Awards for Scientists and Engineers with Disabilities FASED Proposal As part of its effort to promote full utilization of highly qualified scientists, mathematicians, and engineers, and to develop scientific and technical talent, the Foundation has the following goals to reduce or remove barriers to participation in research and training by persons with physical disabilities by providing special equipment and assistance under awards made by NSF and to encourage persons with disabilities to pursue careers in science and engineering by stimulating the development and demonstration of special equipment that facilitates their work performance. Persons with disabilities eligible for facilitation awards include PIs, other senior personnel, and graduate and undergraduate students. The cognizant NSF Program Officer will make decisions regarding what constitutes appropriate support on a case by case basis. The specific nature, purpose, and need for equipment or assistance should be described in sufficient detail in the proposal to permit evaluation by knowledgeable reviewers. There is no separate program for funding of special equipment or assistance. Requests are made in conjunction with regular competitive proposals, or as a supplemental funding request to an existing NSF award. Specific instructions for each type of request are provided below. a. Requests as part of a competitive proposal submission Funds may be requested to purchase special equipment, modify equipment, or provide services required specifically for the work to be undertaken. Requests for funds for equipment or assistance that compensate in a general way for the disabling condition are not permitted. For example, funds may be requested to provide prosthetic devices to manipulate a particular apparatus equipment to convert sound to visual 46 Ideas Labs are generally one to five days in duration.  Proposal Award Policies Procedures Guide II 50 NSF 23 1 signals, or vice versa, for a particular experiment access to a special site or to a mode of transportation except as defined below a reader or interpreter with special technical competence related to the project or other special purpose equipment or assistance needed to conduct a particular project. Items, however, such as standard wheelchairs, prosthetics, hearing aids, TDD text phones, or general readers for the blind would not be supported because the need for them is not specific to the proposed project. Similarly, ramps, elevators, or other structural modifications of research facilities are not eligible for direct support under this program. No maximum funding amount has been established for such requests. It is expected, however, that the cost including equipment adaptation and installation will not be a major component of the total proposed budget for the project. Requests for funds for special equipment or assistance to facilitate the participation of individuals with disabilities should be included in the proposed budget for the project and documented in the budget justification. The specific nature, purpose and need for such equipment or assistance should be described in sufficient detail in the Project Description to permit evaluation of the request by knowledgeable reviewers. b. Supplemental funding requests to existing NSF awards Supplemental funds for special equipment or assistance to facilitate participation in NSF supported projects by persons with disabilities may be requested under existing NSF awards. Normally, title is vested in the recipient organization for equipment purchased in conjunction with NSF supported activities. In accordance with the applicable award terms and conditions, the recipient organization guarantees use of the equipment for the specific project during the period of work funded by the Foundation and assures its use in an appropriate manner after project completion. In instances involving special equipment for persons with disabilities, the need for such may be unique to the individual. In such cases, the recipient organization may elect to transfer title to the individual to assure appropriate use after project completion. Supplemental funding requests should be submitted by using the Supplemental Funding Request function in Research.gov and should include a brief description of the request, a budget, and a budget justification. Requests must be submitted at least two months before funds are needed. Funding decisions will be made on the basis of the justification and availability of program funds with any resultant funding provided through a formal amendment of the existing NSF award. 8. Career Life Balance CLB Supplemental Funding Requests NSF recognizes that primary dependent care responsibilities, or other family considerations, pose unique challenges to the STEM workforce. Career Life Balance supplemental funding to existing awards may be requested as described below a. Research award recipients may request supplemental funding To support additional personnel e.g., a technician or research assistant to sustain research when the PI, co PI, or other member of the senior personnel is on family leave for either primary dependent care responsibilities or other direct family considerations and To support additional personnel e.g., a technician or research assistant to sustain research while a postdoctoral researcher or graduate student being supported by NSF on the award is on family leave for either primary dependent care responsibilities or other direct family considerations. b. Postdoctoral fellowship recipients may request supplemental funding Provided that a postdoctoral fellowship award, funded through one of NSF s postdoctoral fellowship programs, is made to an organization and not directly to the fellow, the recipient may request supplemental funding for the following purpose  Proposal Award Policies Procedures Guide II 51 NSF 23 1 To support additional personnel e.g., a technician or research assistant to sustain research while the postdoctoral fellow being supported by NSF on the award is on family leave for either primary dependent care responsibilities or other direct family considerations. NSF postdoctoral fellows who receive funding directly from NSF rather than through an organization are ineligible to receive CLB supplements. c. Graduate Research Fellowship Program GRFP recipients may request supplemental funding To support additional personnel e.g., a technician or research assistant to sustain the research of the NSF Graduate Research Fellow on approved medical deferral due to primary dependent care family leave situations. 47 d. Special Instructions for the Preparation and Submission of CLB Supplemental Funding Requests For all eligible categories noted above, the supplemental funding request may include funding for up to six months of salary support or stipend for a maximum of 30,000 in direct costs of salary compensation or stipend, but the duration of the salary or stipend support may not exceed the duration of the family leave. Fringe benefits and associated indirect costs F A , but not tuition, may be included in addition to the salary costs, and therefore, the total supplemental funding request may exceed 30,000. All requests for CLB supplemental funding support must be submitted by using the Supplemental Funding Request function in Research.gov and must be adequately justified. It may take NSF up to two months or more to process such a request. CLB supplemental funding requests will usually be reviewed internally unless the program officer determines that the advice of external reviewers is essential. The CLB supplemental funding request must i Clearly specify that it is a CLB supplemental funding request ii Provide a description of how the technician, research assistant, or equivalent would be used to sustain the research effort while the PI, co PI or other member of the senior personnel is on family leave, the postdoctoral researcher or graduate student is on family leave, or the NSF Graduate Research Fellow is on medical deferral due to a family leave situation iii Provide a budget and budget justification in support of the requested costs iv Identify the proposed period of performance for the technician, research assistant, or equivalent v Include the following statement The Authorized Organizational Representative hereby certifies that the request for a technician or equivalent is because the PI co PI senior personnel NSF Graduate Research Fellow postdoctoral researcher graduate student is, or will be, on family leave status or equivalent from the organization in accordance with the organization s policies. The Authorized Organizational Representative also affirms that the organization is able to fill the position for which funding is being requested, in an appropriate timeframe. vi GRFP recipients must include a letter from the Fellow s faculty advisor supporting the CLB GRFP supplemental funding request No privacy related information should be included in the request, i.e., the rationale for leave should not be disclosed to NSF 47 The supplemental funding described in this section of the PAPPG is in addition to the limited paid leave option for Fellows on Tenure with an NSF approved medical deferral.  Proposal Award Policies Procedures Guide II 52 NSF 23 1 Questions about the submission of a CLB supplemental funding request should be addressed to the cognizant NSF program officer. 9. Conference Proposal48 NSF supports conferences in special areas of science and engineering that bring experts together to discuss recent research or education findings or to expose other researchers or students to new research and education techniques. NSF encourages the convening in the U.S. of major international conferences. A conference proposal will be supported only if equivalent results cannot be obtained by attendance at regular meetings of professional societies. Although requests for support of a conference proposal ordinarily originates with educational institutions or scientific and engineering societies, they also may come from other groups. Shared support by several Federal agencies, States or private organizations is encouraged. A conference proposal should generally be submitted at least a year in advance of the scheduled date. Conferences, including the facilities in which they are held, funded in whole or in part with NSF funds, must be accessible to participants with disabilities. It is NSF policy see Chapter XI.A.1.g. to foster harassment free environments wherever science is conducted, including at NSF sponsored conferences. Proposers are required to have a policy or code of conduct that addresses sexual harassment, other forms of harassment49, and sexual assault, and that includes clear and accessible means of reporting violations of the policy or code of conduct. The policy or code of conduct must address the method for making a complaint as well as how any complaints received during the conference will be resolved. This policy or code of conduct must be disseminated to conference participants prior to attendance at the conference as well as made available at the conference itself. Proposers should not submit the policy or code of conduct to NSF for review. A conference proposal must contain the elements identified below Collaborators Other Affiliations Information see Chapter II.C.2.h i for conference proposals in excess of 50,000 Cover Sheet Project Summary see Chapter II.D.2.b Project Description see Chapter II.D.2.d that also includes o A statement of the need for such a gathering and a list of topics o A listing of recent meetings on the same subject, including dates and locations o The names of the chairperson and members of organizing committees and their organizational affiliations o Information on the location and probable date s of the meeting and the method of announcement or invitation 48 This coverage also applies to symposia and workshop proposals. 49 For purposes of this requirement, other forms of harassment is defined as Non gender or non sex based harassment of individuals protected under federal civil rights laws, as set forth in organizational policies or codes of conduct, statutes, regulations, or executive orders.  Proposal Award Policies Procedures Guide II 53 NSF 23 1 o A statement of how the meeting will be organized and conducted, how the results of the meeting will be disseminated and how the meeting will contribute to the enhancement and improvement of scientific, engineering and or educational activities o A plan for recruitment of, and support for, speakers and other attendees, that includes participation of groups underrepresented in science and engineering e.g., underrepresented minorities, women, and persons with disabilities o A description of plans to identify resources for childcare and other types of family care at the conference site to allow individuals with family care responsibilities to attend. Attendance for some participants will be dependent on the availability of such resources. This information should help enable attendees to make arrangements for family care, as needed and i. Results from Prior NSF Support up to five pages . If any PI or co PI identified on the proposal has received prior NSF support including an award with an end date in the past five years or any current funding, including any no cost extensions, information on the award is required for each PI and co PI, regardless of whether the support was directly related to the proposal or not. See Chapter II.D.2.d iii for additional instructions on preparation of this section. Proposal Budget and Budget Justification A budget, and budget justification for the conference prepared in accordance with Chapter II.D.2.f. The following provides a listing of the types of costs that may be included on a conference budget. When anticipated, such costs should be specifically and clearly identified in the proposed scope or work and budget. Note that registration fees under NSF supported conferences are considered program income. For additional information on program income generated from conferences, see Chapter VIII.D.4. o Conference Facilities. Rental of facilities and necessary equipment. o Supplies. Expendable materials and supplies necessary for the meeting. o Conference Services. Costs of translation services, audio visual, webcast, and computer services for recording, transmitting, and transcribing the proceedings. o Publication Costs. Costs of publishing the proceedings. o Salaries. Salaries of professional personnel, editorial, clerical, and other staff members in proportion to the time or effort devoted to the preparation and conduct of the conference and summarizing its results. o Consultant Services and Speaker Fees. Reasonable fees and travel allowances and per diem or meals provided in lieu of per diem . Consultants travel costs, including subsistence, may be included. If requested, the proposer must be able to justify that the proposed rate of pay is reasonable. Additional information on the allowability of consultant or professional service costs is available in 2 CFR 200.459. In addition to other provisions required by the proposing organization, all contracts made under the NSF award must contain the applicable provisions identified in 2 CFR 200, Appendix II. o Meals and Coffee Breaks. Meals that are an integral and necessary part of a conference e.g., working meals where business is transacted . Funds may be included for furnishing a reasonable amount of hot beverages or soft drinks to conference participants and attendees during  Proposal Award Policies Procedures Guide II 54 NSF 23 1 periodic coffee breaks. Proposed costs for meals must be reasonable and otherwise allowable to the extent such costs do not exceed charges normally allowed by the recipient organization in its regular operations as the result of the recipient organizations written policies. In the absence of an acceptable, written recipient organizational policy regarding meal costs, 2 CFR 200.475 d will apply. Costs that will be secured through a service agreement contract should be budgeted under Line G.6, Other Direct Costs, to ensure the proper allocation of indirect costs. o Participant Support Costs. See Chapter II.D.2.f v . o Dependent Care Costs. As needed, the costs of identifying, but not providing, locally available dependent care resources may be included. The following provides a listing of the types of costs that are not allowable for inclusion on a conference budget i Meals and Coffee Breaks for Intramural Meetings. NSF funds may not be included or spent for meals or coffee breaks for intramural meetings of an organization or any of its components, including, but not limited to, laboratories, departments, and centers, as a direct cost. ii Entertainment. Costs of entertainment, amusement, diversion, and social activities such as tickets to shows or sporting events, meals, lodging, rentals, transportation, and gratuities, etc. are unallowable and may not be requested. Travel, meal, and hotel expenses of recipient employees who are not on travel status also are not permitted. See also Chapter II.D.2.f xiii a and 2 CFR 200.438. iii Alcoholic Beverages. No NSF funds may be requested or spent for alcoholic beverages. iv Speaker Fees. Speakers and trainers are not considered participants and should not be included in this section of the budget. However, if the primary purpose of the individual s attendance at the conference is learning and receiving training as a participant, then the costs may be included under participant support. If the primary purpose is to speak or assist with management of the conference, then such costs should be budgeted in appropriate categories other than participant support. Current and Pending Support The support requested or available from other Federal agencies and other sources. See Chapter II.D.2.h ii . Facilities, Equipment and Other Resources If there will be support from other sources for the conference, such information should be included in the Facilities, Equipment and Other Resources section of the proposal. The description should be narrative in nature and must not include any quantifiable financial information. Chapter II.D.2.g should be consulted to prepare this portion of the proposal. If included, these resources will not be auditable and must not be included in the proposal budget or budget justification. A description of such support should be included in the Facilities, Equipment and Other Resources section of the proposal. Data Management Plan Plans for management and sharing of any data products resulting from the activity. See Chapter II.D.2i ii . 10. Equipment Proposal A proposal for specialized equipment may be submitted by an organization for individual investigators groups of investigators within the same department several departments organization s participating in a collaborative or joint arrangement any components of an organization or a region. One individual must be designated as PI. Investigators may be working in closely related areas, or their research may be multidisciplinary.  Proposal Award Policies Procedures Guide II 55 NSF 23 1 An equipment proposal must contain all of the following proposal sections Collaborators Other Affiliations Information see Chapter II.D.2.h iii . Cover Sheet Project Summary see Chapter II.D.2.b Project Description not to exceed 15 pages that includes a. an overall acquisition plan which discusses arrangements for acquisition, maintenance, and operation. Equipment to be purchased, modified or constructed must be described in sufficient detail to allow comparison of its capabilities with the needs of the proposed activities b. a description, from each potential major user, of the project s for which the equipment will be used. This description must be succinct, not necessarily as detailed as in a full research proposal and must emphasize the intrinsic merit of the activity and the importance of the equipment to it. A brief summary will suffice for auxiliary users and c. a description of comparable equipment already at the proposing organization s , if applicable, and an explanation of why it cannot be used. This includes comparable government owned equipment that is on site. d. Results from Prior NSF Support up to five pages . If any PI or co PI identified on the proposal has received prior NSF support including an award with an end date in the past five years or any current funding, including any no cost extensions, information on the award is required for each PI and co PI, regardless of whether the support was directly related to the proposal or not. See Chapter II.D.2.d iii for additional instructions on preparation of this section. Biographical Sketch es of the person s who will have overall responsibility for maintenance and operation of the equipment and a brief statement of qualifications. Chapter II.D.2.h i should be consulted to prepare this portion of the proposal also see Chapter II.D.2.h i c . Proposal Budget and Budget Justification A budget and budget justification for the operation, maintenance, and administration of the proposed equipment Chapter II.D.2.f should be consulted to prepare this portion of the proposal . Current and Pending Support Chapter II.D.2.h ii should be consulted to prepare this portion of the proposal. Facilities, Equipment and Other Resources that includes a description of the physical facility, including floor plans or other appropriate information, where the equipment will be located a narrative description of the source of funds available for operation and maintenance of the proposed equipment a brief description of other support services available, and a statement of why the equipment is severable or non severable from the physical facility Chapter II.C.2.i should be consulted to prepare this portion of the proposal .  Proposal Award Policies Procedures Guide II 56 NSF 23 1 Data Management Plan see Chapter II.D.2.i ii . Postdoctoral Mentoring Plan if applicable Chapter II.D.2.i i should be consulted to prepare this portion of the proposal. This type of proposal normally competes with proposals for research or education projects.50 11. Travel Proposal A proposal for travel support, either domestic and or international, for participation in scientific and engineering meetings is handled by the NSF organizational unit with program responsibility for the area of interest. A group travel proposal is encouraged as the primary means of support for travel. A university, professional society or other non profit organization may apply for funds to enable it to coordinate and support participation in one or more scientific meeting s . A proposal submitted for this purpose must contain the elements identified below, with particular attention to plans for composition and recruitment of the travel group. Information on planned speakers should be provided, where available, from the conference organizer. Cover Sheet Project Summary see Chapter II.D.2.b Project Description not to exceed 15 pages that includes a. A statement of the need for attending such a gathering and a list of topics b. A listing of recent meetings on the same subject, including dates and locations c. Information on the location and probable date s of the meeting d. A statement of how the meeting will be organized and conducted, how the results of the meeting will be disseminated and how the meeting will contribute to the enhancement and improvement of scientific, engineering and or educational activities and e. Results from Prior NSF Support up to five pages . If any PI or co PI identified on the proposal has received prior NSF support including an award with an end date in the past five years or any current funding, including any no cost extensions, information on the award is required for each PI and co PI, regardless of whether the support was directly related to the proposal or not. See Chapter II.D.2.d iii for additional instructions on preparation of this section. Proposal Budget and Budget Justification A budget and budget justification for the travel prepared in accordance with Chapter II.D.2.f. A group travel proposal may request support only for the travel costs of the proposed activity. A recipient of a group travel award is required to retain supporting documentation that funds were spent in accordance with the original intent of the proposal. Such documentation may be 50 See Chapter IX.D. for additional information on the administration of equipment awards.  Proposal Award Policies Procedures Guide II 57 NSF 23 1 required in final reports and is subject to audit. Guidance on specific costs relevant to a group travel proposal is highlighted below. a. Travel, meal, and hotel expenses of recipient employees who are not on travel status are unallowable. Costs of employees on travel status are limited to those specifically authorized by 2 CFR 200.475. b. Temporary dependent care costs a dependent is defined in 26 USC 152 above and beyond regular dependent care that will directly result from travel to conferences are allowable costs provided that the costs are i a direct result of the individual s travel for the NSF conference award ii consistent with the recipient s documented travel policy for all employee travel and iii only temporary during the travel period. See 2 CFR 200.475 for additional information on travel costs. c. For proposals to support travel to international destinations, in accordance with the Fly America Act 49 USC 40118 , any air transportation to, from, between, or within a country other than the U.S. of persons or property, the expense of which will be assisted by NSF funding, must be performed by or under a code sharing arrangement with a U.S. flag air carrier if service provided by such a carrier is available see Comptroller General Decision B 240956, dated September 25, 1991 . Tickets or documentation for electronic tickets must identify the U.S. flag air carrier s designator code and flight number. See Chapter XI.F for additional information. Current and Pending Support The support requested or available from other Federal agencies and other sources. Chapter II.D.2.h ii must be consulted to prepare this portion of the proposal. Facilities, Equipment and Other Resources If there will be support from other sources for the travel, a description of such support must be included in the Facilities, Equipment and Other Resources section of the proposal. The description should be narrative in nature and must not include any quantifiable financial information. Chapter II.D.2.g must be consulted to prepare this portion of the proposal. If included, these resources will not be auditable and must not be included in the proposal budget or budget justification. Data Management Plan Plans for management and sharing of any data products resulting from the activity. Chapter II.D.2.i ii must be consulted to prepare this portion of the proposal. By signing the Cover Sheet, the AOR is certifying that prior to the proposer s participation in the meeting, the proposer will assure that the meeting organizer has a written policy or code of conduct that addresses sexual harassment, other forms of harassment, and sexual assault, and that includes clear and accessible means of reporting violations of the policy or code of conduct. The policy or code of conduct must address the method for making a complaint as well as how any complaints received during the meeting will be resolved. The proposer is not required to submit the meeting organizer s policy or code of conduct for review by NSF. 12. Center Proposal NSF provides support for a variety of individual Centers and Centers programs that contribute to the Foundation s vision as outlined in the NSF Strategic Plan. Centers exploit opportunities in science, engineering, and technology in which the complexity of the research problem s or the resources needed to solve the se problem s require the advantages of scope, scale, change, duration, equipment, facilities, and students that can only be provided by an academic research center. They focus on investigations at the frontiers of knowledge not normally attainable through individual investigations, at the interfaces of  Proposal Award Policies Procedures Guide II 58 NSF 23 1 disciplines and or by incorporating fresh approaches to the core of disciplines. Centers focus on integrative learning and discovery and demonstrate leadership in broadening participation through focused investments in a diverse set of partner organizations and individuals. In doing so, they draw upon, and contribute to, the development of the Nation s full intellectual talent. Most Center awards are limited to a maximum duration of ten years and are often subject to mid course external merit review. Proposers interested in learning more about current or future NSF Centers are encouraged to contact the appropriate disciplinary NSF Program Officer. Centers are not considered research infrastructure but will often use research infrastructure to meet their objectives. 13. Research Infrastructure Proposal As an integral part of its responsibility for strengthening the science and engineering capacity of the country, NSF provides support for the design, construction, operation, and upgrade of research infrastructure. NSF defines research infrastructure as any combination of facilities, equipment, instrumentation, computational hardware and software, and the necessary supporting human capital. Research infrastructure includes major research instrumentation, mid scale projects and major facilities. NSF depends on the research communities to provide the justification as well as the capabilities to manage the development and implementation of research infrastructure projects. Justification normally occurs through National Academies studies, workshop reports, professional society activities, and other community based mechanisms, including engineering studies and research projects related to the development of new technologies. Many of these mechanisms are funded by interested NSF Programs on the basis of merit reviewed proposals. The NSF process and funding mechanisms for development and implementation of research infrastructure projects depends, in part, on the scale of the project. Construction of the largest projects, major facilities, is typically supported through the Major Research Equipment and Facilities Construction MREFC account. Proposers are strongly encouraged to contact the appropriate NSF Program to discuss the availability of funding and the appropriate funding mechanisms in advance of proposal submission. The Research Infrastructure Guide, a public document managed by the Large Facilities Office, contains policies and procedures related to NSF oversight and Recipient management of larger research infrastructure projects funded by NSF. The purpose of the Research Infrastructure Guide is to 1 provide guidance to NSF staff on conducting appropriate oversight and to recipients in carrying out effective project planning and management and 2 clearly state the required policies and procedures as well as pertinent good practices for each life cycle stage.  Proposal Award Policies Procedures Guide II 59 NSF 23 1 Exhibit II 1 Proposal Preparation Checklist It is imperative that all proposals conform to the proposal preparation and submission instructions specified in Part I of the Proposal and Award Policies and Procedures Guide. Conformance with all preparation and submission instructions is required and will be strictly enforced unless a deviation or accommodation has been approved in advance of proposal submission. Note that some NSF program solicitations modify standard NSF proposal preparation guidelines, and, in such cases, the guidelines provided in the solicitation must be followed. The requirements specified for each type of proposal are compliance checked by NSF electronic systems prior to submission. Proposers are strongly advised to review Chapter II.D for Research proposals and the applicable sections of Chapter II.F. relevant to the other types of proposals being developed prior to submission. NSF will not accept51 or will return without review proposals that are not consistent with these instructions. See Chapter IV.B and the Automated Compliance Checking of NSF Proposals webpage for additional information. Prior to submission, it is strongly recommended that an administrative review be conducted to ensure that proposals comply with the instructions, and the format specified. This checklist is not intended to be an all inclusive repetition of the required proposal contents and associated proposal preparation guidelines. It is, however, meant to highlight certain critical items so they will not be overlooked when the proposal is prepared. General The proposer has an active and valid SAM registration and a valid UEI. The proposer has reviewed and certified compliance with the government wide financial assistance certifications and representations in SAM. The proposal is compliant with the provisions in the PAPPG and or the relevant Broad Agency Announcement BAA or program solicitation. The proposal is responsive to the relevant program description or announcement if applicable . If the proposal has been previously declined and is being resubmitted, the proposal has been substantively revised to take into account the major comments from the prior NSF review. The proposed work is appropriate for funding by NSF, and is not a duplicate of, or substantially similar to, a proposal already under consideration by NSF from the same submitter. The proposal will be submitted by 5 p.m. submitter s local time if there is an established deadline date. Single Copy Documents Authorization to Deviate from NSF Proposal Preparation Requirements is included if applicable . List of Suggested Reviewers, or Reviewers Not To Include has been provided if applicable . 51 Proposal Not Accepted is defined as Research.gov will not permit submission of the proposal.  Proposal Award Policies Procedures Guide II 60 NSF 23 1 Proposers that require a reasonable and or accessibility accommodation have contacted the applicable NSF office. SF LLL, Disclosure of Lobbying Activities has been provided if applicable . Collaborators and Other Affiliations COA Information has been separately provided for each individual identified as senior personnel through use of the COA template. Cover Sheet For interdisciplinary proposals, all relevant programs have been identified. Proposal title includes any necessary prefix. For a renewal proposal, the previous award number has been entered. Related letter of intent number has been entered if applicable . Related preliminary proposal number has been entered if applicable . The Special Exception to the Deadline Date Policy box has been checked on the NSF Cover Sheet and the requisite Single Copy Document has been provided if applicable . Appropriate box es have been checked, and requisite information has been provided. If the box for Funding of an International Branch Campus of a U.S. IHE or Funding of a Foreign Organization or Foreign Individual has been checked on the Cover Sheet, the name of the applicable country ies in the International Activities Country Name s box es has been provided. Project Summary The Project Summary does not exceed one page. The Project Summary contains an overview, a statement on the intellectual merit of the proposed activity, and a statement on the broader impacts of the proposed activity. Project Description The Project Description does not exceed the 15 page limitation specified in the PAPPG, the relevant program solicitation or BAA, or the limitation provided in the instructions for types of proposals e.g., Planning, RAPID, EAGER and Ideas Lab . Project Description contains a separate section labeled Broader Impacts . Project Description contains the requisite explanation justification for proposals that include funding to an International Branch Campus of a U.S. IHE or to a foreign organization or foreign individual, including through use of a subaward or consultant arrangement. Project Description is self contained, and Uniform Resource Locators URLs have not been included. Results from Prior NSF Support have been provided for any PI or co PI identified on the proposal that has received prior NSF support including  Proposal Award Policies Procedures Guide II 61 NSF 23 1 an award with an end date in the past five years or any current funding, including any no cost extensions. Results related to Intellectual Merit and Broader Impacts are described under two separate, distinct headings and Results are limited to five pages of the Project Description. References Cited This section includes bibliographic citations only and does not provide parenthetical information outside of the Project Description. Each reference is in the required format, which may vary according to the norms of the scientific discipline. Biographical Sketch es A separate Biographical Sketch has been prepared through use of SciENcv and provided for each individual identified as senior personnel. Each pdf file has been uploaded into Research.gov or Grants.gov. Each Biographical Sketch does not exceed three pages. The content described has been prepared in accordance with the instructions, and does not contain additional information beyond that specified. Proposal Budget Each budget line item has been documented and justified in the Budget Justification. Any compensation for senior personnel in excess of two months has been disclosed in the Proposal Budget and justified in the Budget Justification. Contracts for the purpose of obtaining goods and services for the proposer s own use have been identified on Line G6 of the Proposal Budget, when applicable. The amount for indirect costs was calculated by applying the current negotiated indirect cost rate s to the approved base s , and the amount has been specified in the Budget Justification. Each Budget Justification does not exceed five pages or the page limitation specified in the relevant program solicitation. For proposals that contain subawards, each subaward includes a separate Budget Justification that does not exceed five pages. Cost Sharing Unless required by an NSF program solicitation, voluntary committed cost sharing has not been included. Note that voluntary committed cost sharing is prohibited and Line M on the proposal budget will not be available for use by the proposer. While not required by NSF, proposing organizations may, at their own discretion, continue to contribute voluntary  Proposal Award Policies Procedures Guide II 62 NSF 23 1 uncommitted cost sharing to NSF sponsored projects. These resources are not auditable by NSF and should not be included in the Proposal Budget or Budget Justification. Current and Pending Support A separate Current and Pending Support document has been prepared through use of SciENcv and provided for each individual identified as senior personnel. Each pdf file has been uploaded into Research.gov or Grants.gov. The content described has been prepared in accordance with the instructions, and does not contain additional information beyond that specified. Facilities, Equipment and Other Resources An aggregated description of the internal and external resources both physical and personnel that the organization and its collaborators will provide to the project, should it be funded, has been included. In kind contributions intended for use on the project being proposed such as office laboratory space, equipment, supplies, employees, students have been identified, where applicable. No quantifiable financial information has been provided. If there are no facilities, equipment or other resources identified, a statement to that effect has been included in this section of the proposal and uploaded into Research.gov or Grants.gov. Special Information and Supplementary Documentation A Postdoctoral Mentoring Plan, limited to one page, has been included, if required. A Data Management Plan, limited to two pages, has been included. Letters of collaboration documenting collaborative arrangements of significance to the proposal have been included, if applicable. Other types of information identified in Chapter II.C.2.i have been included, as appropriate. Any additional items specified in a relevant BAA or program solicitation have been included. Appendices Appendices have not been included unless a deviation has been authorized. Other Types of Proposals For other types of proposals see Chapter II.F , the applicable proposal preparation guidance has been followed.  Proposal Award Policies Procedures Guide II 63 NSF 23 1 Exhibit II 2 Potentially Disqualifying Conflicts of Interest Unless a waiver has been granted by NSF, a reviewer cannot review a proposal if the reviewer, the reviewer s spouse, minor child, or business partner an organization where the reviewer is employed, serves as a consultant, has an arrangement for future employment or is negotiating for employment or the organization where the reviewer is an officer, director, trustee, or partner has a financial interest in the outcome of the proposal. Unless a waiver has been granted by NSF, a potential reviewer also may be barred from reviewing a proposal, if it involves individuals with whom the potential reviewer has a personal relationship, such as a close relative, current or former collaborator, or former Ph.D. student advisor. Unless a waiver has been granted by NSF, a disqualifying conflict may exist, if a proposal involves an organization or other entity with which the potential reviewer has a connection. Such potentially disqualifying connections include a reviewer s recent former employer an organization in which the reviewer is an active participant an institution at which the reviewer or a member of the reviewer s household is currently enrolled as a student, or at which the reviewer serves as a visiting committee member or an entity with which the reviewer has or seeks some other business or financial relationship including receipt of an honorarium .  Proposal Award Policies Procedures Guide II 64 NSF 23 1 Exhibit II 3 Definitions of Categories of Personnel The personnel categories listed on parts A and B of the Proposal Budget are defined as follows A. Senior Personnel For purposes of NSF, senior personnel include 1. co Principal Investigator PI the individuals designated by the proposing recipient organization and approved by the Federal research funding agency who contribute in a substantive, meaningful way to the scientific development or execution of a research and development project proposed to be carried out with a research and development award. NSF does not infer any distinction in scientific stature among multiple PIs, whether referred to as PI or co PI. If more than one, the first one listed will serve as the contact PI, with whom all communications between NSF program officials and the project relating to the scientific, technical, and budgetary aspects of the project should take place. The PI and any identified co PIs, however, will be jointly responsible for submission of the requisite project reports. For purposes of this document, when used throughout, the term Principal Investigator also includes Project Director PD , and the term co PI also includes co PD. 2. Faculty Associate faculty member or equivalent an individual other than the Principal Investigator s considered by the performing institution to be a member of its faculty or equivalent or who holds an appointment as a faculty member at another institution, and who will participate in the project being supported. B. Other Personnel 1. Postdoctoral Scholar, Fellow, or Other Postdoctoral Position an individual who has received a doctoral degree or equivalent and is engaged in a temporary and defined period of mentored advanced training to enhance the professional skills and research independence needed to pursue his or her chosen career path. Postdoctoral scholars not identified under Senior Personnel above should be listed as Other Personnel. 2. Other Professional a person who may or may not hold a doctoral degree or its equivalent, who is considered a professional and is not reported as a Principal Investigator, faculty associate, postdoctoral scholar, or student. Examples of persons included in this category are doctoral associates not reported under B1, professional technicians, physicians, veterinarians, system experts, computer programmers, and design engineers. 3. Graduate Student research assistant a part time or full time student working on the project in a research capacity who holds at least a bachelor s degree and is enrolled in a degree program leading to an advanced degree. 4. Undergraduate Student a student who is enrolled in a degree program part time or full time leading to a bachelor s or associate s degree. 5. 6. These categories include persons working on the project in a non research capacity, such as secretaries, clerk typists, draftsmen, animal caretakers, electricians, and custodial personnel regardless of whether they hold a degree or are involved in degree work. Any personnel category for which NSF funds are requested must indicate, in the parentheses provided on the Proposal Budget, the number of persons expected to receive some support from those funds.  Proposal Award Policies Procedures Guide III 1 NSF 23 1 Chapter III NSF Proposal Processing and Review Proposals received by NSF are assigned to the appropriate NSF program and are assessed to ensure that they meet NSF compliance requirements. All compliant proposals are then carefully reviewed by a scientist, engineer, or educator serving as an NSF Program Officer, and usually by three to ten other persons outside NSF either as ad hoc reviewers, panelists, or both, who are experts in the particular fields represented by the proposal. Proposers are invited to suggest names of persons they believe are especially well qualified to review the proposal and or persons they would prefer not review the proposal. These suggestions may serve as one source in the reviewer selection process at the Program Officer s discretion. In addition, Program Officers may obtain comments from site visits before recommending final action on proposals. Senior NSF staff further review recommendations for awards. A flowchart that depicts the entire NSF proposal and award process and associated timeline is included as Exhibit III 1. A comprehensive description of the Foundation s merit review process is available on the NSF website. Proposal review is one step in the NSF program planning and implementation process. Embedded in this process are core strategies that are fundamental to the fulfillment of NSF s mission. More information about NSF s mission and strategies can be found in Building the Future Investing in Discovery and Innovation NSF Strategic Plan for Fiscal Years FY 2018 2022. NSF s mission is particularly well implemented through the integration of research and education and broadening participation in NSF programs, projects, and activities. A. Merit Review Principles and Criteria The National Science Foundation strives to invest in a robust and diverse portfolio of projects that creates new knowledge and enables breakthroughs in understanding across all areas of science and engineering research and education. To identify which projects to support, NSF relies on a merit review process that incorporates consideration of both the technical aspects of a proposed project and its potential to contribute more broadly to advancing NSF s mission to promote the progress of science to advance the national health, prosperity, and welfare to secure the national defense and for other purposes. NSF makes every effort to conduct a fair, competitive, transparent merit review process for the selection of projects. 1. Merit Review Principles These principles are to be given due diligence by PIs and organizations when preparing proposals and managing projects, by reviewers when reading and evaluating proposals, and by NSF program staff when determining whether or not to recommend proposals for funding and while overseeing awards. Given that NSF is the primary Federal agency charged with nurturing and supporting excellence in basic research and education, the following three principles apply All NSF projects should be of the highest quality and have the potential to advance, if not transform, the frontiers of knowledge. NSF projects, in the aggregate, should contribute more broadly to achieving societal goals. These broader impacts may be accomplished through the research itself, through activities that are directly related to specific research projects, or through activities that are supported by, but are complementary to, the project. The project activities may be based on previously established and or innovative methods and approaches, but in either case must be well justified. Meaningful assessment and evaluation of NSF funded projects should be based on appropriate metrics, keeping in mind the likely correlation between the effect of broader impacts and the resources provided to implement projects. If the size of the activity is limited, evaluation of that activity in isolation is not likely to be meaningful. Thus, assessing the effectiveness of these activities may best be done at a higher, more aggregated, level than the individual project.  Proposal Award Policies Procedures Guide III 2 NSF 23 1 With respect to the third principle, even if assessment of Broader Impacts outcomes for particular projects is done at an aggregated level, PIs are expected to be accountable for carrying out the activities described in the funded project. Thus, individual projects should include clearly stated goals, specific descriptions of the activities that the PI intends to do, and a plan in place to document the outputs of those activities. These three merit review principles provide the basis for the merit review criteria, as well as a context within which the users of the criteria can better understand their intent. 2. Merit Review Criteria All NSF proposals are evaluated through use of two National Science Board approved merit review criteria. In some instances, however, NSF will employ additional criteria as required to highlight the specific objectives of certain programs and activities. The two merit review criteria are listed below. Both criteria are to be given full consideration during the review and decision making processes each criterion is necessary but neither, by itself, is sufficient. Therefore, proposers must fully address both criteria. Chapter II.D.2.d i contains additional information for use by proposers in development of the Project Description section of the proposal. Reviewers are strongly encouraged to review the criteria, including Chapter II.D.2.d i , prior to the review of a proposal. When evaluating NSF proposals, reviewers will be asked to consider what the proposers want to do, why they want to do it, how they plan to do it, how they will know if they succeed, and what benefits could accrue if the project is successful. These issues apply both to the technical aspects of the proposal and the way in which the project may make broader contributions. To that end, reviewers will be asked to evaluate all proposals against two criteria Intellectual Merit The Intellectual Merit criterion encompasses the potential to advance knowledge and Broader Impacts The Broader Impacts criterion encompasses the potential to benefit society and contribute to the achievement of specific, desired societal outcomes. The following elements should be considered in the review for both criteria 1. What is the potential for the proposed activity to a. Advance knowledge and understanding within its own field or across different fields Intellectual Merit and b. Benefit society or advance desired societal outcomes Broader Impacts 2. To what extent do the proposed activities suggest and explore creative, original, or potentially transformative concepts 3. Is the plan for carrying out the proposed activities well reasoned, well organized, and based on a sound rationale Does the plan incorporate a mechanism to assess success 4. How well qualified is the individual, team, or organization to conduct the proposed activities 5. Are there adequate resources available to the PI either at the home organization or through collaborations to carry out the proposed activities  Proposal Award Policies Procedures Guide III 3 NSF 23 1 B. Selection of Reviewers The NSF guidelines for the selection of reviewers are designed to ensure selection of experts who can give Program Officers the proper information needed to make a recommendation in accordance with the NSB approved criteria for selection of projects. Optimally, reviewers should have 1. Special knowledge of the science and engineering subfields involved in the proposals to be reviewed to evaluate competence, intellectual merit, and utility of the proposed activity. Within reasonable limits, reviewers fields of specialty should be complementary within a reviewer group. 2. Broader or more generalized knowledge of the science and engineering subfields involved in the proposals to be reviewed to evaluate the broader impacts of the proposed activity. Reviewers with broad expertise are required for proposals involving substantial size or complexity, broad disciplinary or multidisciplinary content, or significant national or international implications. 3. Broad knowledge of the infrastructure of the science and engineering enterprise, and its educational activities, to evaluate contributions to societal goals, scientific and engineering personnel, and distribution of resources to organizations and geographical areas. 4. To the extent possible, diverse representation within the review group. The goal is to achieve a balance among various characteristics. Important factors to consider include type of organization represented, reviewer diversity, age distribution and geographic balance. C. Proposal File Updates It is the responsibility of the proposing organization to thoroughly review each proposal prior to submission. On occasion, however, a problem is identified with a portion of the proposal after the proposal has been submitted electronically to NSF. The Submitted Proposals Module in Research.gov allows the organization to request the replacement of files or revision of other proposal attributes, associated with a previously submitted proposal. All budgetary revisions must be submitted through Submitted Proposals Module in Research.gov. See Section D. below for further information. A request for a proposal file update must be signed and submitted by the AOR. A Proposal Update Justification must be provided that addresses 1. why the changes or file replacements are being requested and 2. any differences between the original and proposed replacement files. A request for a proposal file update automatically will be accepted if submitted prior to the deadline date initiation of external peer review in cases when a target date is utilized 49 and initiation of external peer review in the case of an unsolicited proposal. A request for a proposal file update after the timeframes specified above will require acceptance by the cognizant NSF Program Officer. Such requests shall be submitted only to correct a technical problem with the proposal i.e., formatting or print problems . Changes in the content of the proposal should not be requested after the timeframes specified above. When a request is accepted, the proposed files or revisions to proposal attributes will immediately replace the existing files and become part of the official proposal. 49The status of a proposal may be found in Research.gov.  Proposal Award Policies Procedures Guide III 4 NSF 23 1 PIs can access the Proposal File Update Module via the Submitted Proposals Module in Research.gov. Authorized individuals in the organization s SPO can initiate or review requests for proposal file updates using the Submitted Proposals Module in Research.gov.50 NSF will consider only one request for a proposal file update per proposal at a time. It is anticipated that it will be a rare occurrence for more than one file update request to be submitted for a proposal. D. Revisions to Proposals Made During the Review Process In the event of a significant development e.g., research findings, changed circumstances, unavailability of PI or other senior personnel, etc. that might materially affect the outcome of the review of a pending proposal, the proposer must contact the cognizant NSF Program Officer to discuss the issue. Submitting additional information must not be used as a means of circumventing page limitations or stated deadlines. Before recommending whether or not NSF should support a particular project, the cognizant NSF Program Officer may, subject to certain constraints outlined below, engage in discussions with the proposing PI s . Negotiating budgets generally involves discussing a lower or higher amount of total support for the proposed project. The cognizant NSF Program Officer may suggest reducing or eliminating costs for specific budget items that are clearly unnecessary or unreasonable for the activities to be undertaken, especially when the review process supports such changes however, this would generally not include faculty salaries, salary rates, fringe benefits, or tuition. Note indirect cost F A rates are not subject to negotiation. The NSF Program Officer may discuss with PIs the bottom line award amount, i.e., the total NSF funding that will be recommended for a project. NSF Program Officers may not renegotiate cost sharing or other organizational commitments. When such discussions result in a budget reduction of 10 or more from the amount originally proposed, a corresponding reduction should be made in the scope of the project. A revised proposal budget, budget justification, as well as a Budget Impact Statement that describes the impact of the budget reduction on the scope of the project, must be provided. Proposers must use the Submitted Proposals Module in Research.gov to submit this information. Revised proposal budgets must be signed and submitted by the AOR. E. Funding Recommendation After scientific, technical, and programmatic review and consideration of appropriate factors, the NSF Program Officer recommends to the cognizant NSF Division Director whether the proposal should be declined or recommended for award. Normally, final programmatic approval is at the Division Office level. Because of the large volume of proposals, this review and consideration process may take up to six months. Large or particularly complex proposals may require additional review and processing time. Should a proposal be recommended for award, the PI may be contacted by the NSF Program Officer for assistance in preparation of the public award abstract and its title. An NSF award abstract, with its title, is an NSF document that describes the project and justifies the expenditure of Federal funds by articulating how the project serves the national interest, as stated by NSF s mission to promote the progress of science to advance the national health, prosperity and welfare or to secure the national defense. Note that a recommendation for an award by an NSF Program Officer does not constitute approval or obligation of Federal funds. Proposers are cautioned that only an appointed NSF Grants and Agreements Officer may make commitments, obligations, or awards on behalf of NSF or authorize the expenditure of funds. No commitment on the part of NSF or the Government should be inferred from technical or budgetary discussions with an NSF Program Officer. A PI or organization that makes financial or personnel 50Detailed instructions on submitting proposer initiated proposal file updates are available on the Research.gov website.  Proposal Award Policies Procedures Guide III 5 NSF 23 1 commitments in the absence of an award notice approved by an NSF Grants and Agreements Officer does so at its own risk. F. NSF s Decision to Award or Decline Proposals Declination of proposals for programmatic reasons is addressed in Chapter IV.C. 1. Decision to Award or Financially Administratively Decline a Proposal If the program recommendation is to award a proposal and final Division Office or other programmatic approval is obtained, then the recommended proposal goes to the Division of Grants and Agreements DGA or the Division of Acquisition and Cooperative Support DACS for review of business, financial and policy implications. Pre award review includes utilization of NSF s risk based framework, which evaluates the risks posed by proposers prior to issuance of an NSF award. After the completion of any necessary pre award administrative and or financial reviews, a final decision by a Grants and Agreements Officer will be made to fund or decline the proposal. See Chapter VI for additional information on NSF Awards. DGA generally makes the decision to award or decline proposals within 30 days after the program Division Office makes its recommendation. DACS review of major facilities and related proposals follows the requirements and timeline in the Research Infrastructure Guide. Proposals from organizations that have not had an active NSF award within the preceding five years involve special situations such as coordination with another Federal agency or a private funding source are to be awarded as cooperative agreements are new or renewal proposals that exceed 20 million in total costs or have other unusual considerations may require additional review and processing time. NSF will report proposals that are declined for reasons that meet the guidelines set forth by OMB to the OMB designated integrity and performance system currently FAPIIS in accordance with Federal wide requirements, but only after the proposer has had an opportunity to exhaust the appeal procedures contained in Chapter III.F.2 below. 2. Process to Appeal NSF s Decision to Decline a Proposal for Financial or Administrative Reasons a. Background A proposer who has been declined for an NSF award for reasons related to NSF s pre award financial and administrative reviews will be afforded the opportunity to discuss the decline decision with the cognizant NSF Grants and Agreements Officer or Branch Chief in DGA or DACS. If, after obtaining further clarification from the cognizant NSF Grants and Agreements Officer or Branch Chief in DGA or DACS, the proposer believes that NSF made a substantive or procedural error in arriving at its decision to decline an award, the proposer may submit a request for review to the cognizant Division Director of DGA or DACS. The decision made by the cognizant Division Director of DGA or DACS is final. Award of NSF assistance is discretionary. A formal hearing, therefore, is not provided.  Proposal Award Policies Procedures Guide III 6 NSF 23 1 b. Applicability Chapter III.F.2.c below contains the process by which proposers may appeal a DGA or DACS Branch Chief s decision to decline an NSF award arising from NSF s pre award financial and administrative reviews. This process does not apply to decisions to return or decline a proposal for any other reason. Proposals declined for administrative or financial reasons are not eligible for reconsideration under Chapter IV.D. c. Procedures i Proposers who are declined for an NSF award for financial or administrative reasons will be identified as such in the declination notice. A proposer who disagrees with NSF s decision should first contact the cognizant NSF Grants and Agreements Officer or Branch Chief in DGA or DACS, who will afford the proposer an informal opportunity to obtain further clarification. ii If dissatisfied with the explanation provided by the cognizant NSF Grants and Agreements Officer or Branch Chief in DGA or DACS, the proposing organization s AOR may submit a request for review to the cognizant Division Director of DGA or DACS. The letter must be addressed to the Division Director, DGA, or the Division Director, DACS as appropriate, and must be received by the Foundation within 30 days after the date of the declination notice. The time for filing a request for review is strictly enforced and no extensions for the purpose of preparing it will be granted. iii The request for review need not follow any prescribed format. However, it must contain a full statement of the proposer s position with respect to the disputed matter, as well as the facts and reasons supporting the proposer s position that the declination was unwarranted. The request may address any errors made in the financial and administrative review process, and it may contain supporting documentation that was not originally presented as part of the financial and administrative review process. However, NSF will not consider any new information that would not have been available at the time the decision to decline was made. Therefore, new information presented in relation to the proposer s financial stability or the quality of its management systems will not be considered. iv The Division Director, DGA or DACS, will review or designate one or more individuals to review the matter. In no case will the review be undertaken by any individual involved with the decline decision. The reviewing official s may request additional information from the proposer, but only information that would have been available at the time the decision to decline was made will be considered. v The designated reviewing official s will, within 30 days of NSF s receipt of the request for review, forward a report to the Division Director, DGA or DACS or designee for a final written decision for the agency. The Division Director, DGA or DACS or designee will communicate the decision in writing to the proposer, normally within 15 days of receipt of the report, unless otherwise specified by NSF. The decision made by the Division Director, DGA or DACS, is final.  Proposal Award Policies Procedures Guide III 7 NSF 23 1 G. Review Information Provided to PI When a decision has been made whether an award or a declination , the following information is released electronically to the PI description of the process in which the proposal was reviewed copies of all reviews used in the decision with any reviewer identifying information redacted if the proposal was reviewed by a panel at any point in the process a copy of the panel summary and recommendation and or site visit reports, if applicable. In addition, if not otherwise provided in the panel summary, the PI is provided a written explanation of the basis for the declination. A PI also may request and obtain any other releasable material in NSF s file on the individual s proposal. Everything in the file, except information that identifies either reviewers or other pending or declined proposals is usually releasable to the PI. Reviews are made available directly to the PI, to provide feedback for the purpose of improving proposed research and research methods, and to assist in preparation of future proposals. They are not intended for any other purpose. H. Release of Recipient Proposal Information A proposal that results in an NSF award will be made available to the public on request, consistent with the Freedom of Information Act, except for privileged information or material that is personal, proprietary, or otherwise exempt from disclosure under law. Appropriate labeling in the proposal aids identification of what may be specifically exempt. See Chapter II.E.1 Such information will be withheld from public disclosure to the extent permitted by law. Without assuming any liability for inadvertent disclosure, NSF will seek to limit disclosure of such information to its employees and to outside reviewers when necessary for merit review of the proposal, or as otherwise authorized by law. Portions of proposals resulting in awards that contain descriptions of inventions in which either the Government or the recipient owns a right, title, or interest including a non exclusive license will not normally be made available to the public until a reasonable time has been allowed for filing patent applications. NSF will notify the recipient of receipt of requests for copies of funded proposals so the recipient may advise NSF of such inventions described, or other confidential, commercial, or proprietary information contained in the proposal.  Exhibit III 1 NSF Proposal Award Process Timeline NSF Announces Opportunity Research Education Communities NSF Program Officer Ad Hoc Panel Combination Internal Research.GOV Submit Proposal Preparation Proposal Receipt to DD Concurrence of PO Recommendation DGA Review Processing Proposal Receipt at NSF Can be returned without review withdrawn Award Award Decline DD Concur 90 Days 30 Days 6 Months Division Director Concurrence Via DGA and DACS Organization Program Officer Analysis Recommendations In accordance with Chapter III.F. the Division of Grants and Agreements DGA or the Division of Acquisition and Cooperative Support DACS may decline a proposal recommended for award after conducting a review of business, financial and policy implications.   Text Description for Exhibit III 1 NSF Proposal Award Process Timeline This diagram shows the entire NSF proposal award process timeline. The process is divided into three stages depicting proposal preparation, proposal receipt to division director concurrence of program officer recommendation, and DGA DACS review and processing. Proposal Preparation Proposers have a minimum of 90 days from NSF s announcement of a funding opportunity to prepare and submit a proposal. Proposal must be submitted in either Research.gov or Grants.Gov. Proposal Receipt to DD Concurrence of PO Recommendation Proposals received by NSF are assigned to the appropriate NSF program for review. Proposals are reviewed either by ad hoc reviewers, panelists, or both. Some proposals may be reviewed internally. After review and consideration, the NSF Program Officer recommends to the cognizant Division Director whether the proposal should be awarded or declined. The Division Director will either concur or not concur with the Program Officer s recommendation. NSF strives to be able to tell applicants whether their proposals have been declined or recommended for funding within six months. DGA DACS Review Processing After programmatic approval has been obtained, the proposals recommended for funding will be forwarded to the Division of Grants and Agreements or the Division of Acquisition and Cooperative Support for review of business, financial, and policy implications. After administrative review, Grants and Agreements Officers perform the processing and issuance of a grant or other agreement to the organization. The interval between Division Director Concurrence and the issuance of a grant or other agreement is generally up to 30 days.  Proposal Award Policies Procedures Guide IV 1 NSF 23 1 Chapter IV Non Award Decisions and Transactions A. Proposal Withdrawal A proposal may be withdrawn at any time before a funding recommendation is made by the cognizant NSF Program Officer. Research.gov automates the proposal withdrawal process and provides a mechanism that will help organizations to more effectively manage their proposal portfolio, as well as to help eliminate the submission of duplicate proposals to NSF. The Withdrawals Module includes three processes Principal Investigator s Proposal Withdrawal allows a PI to initiate a proposal withdrawal and forward it to the organization s AOR for submission to NSF. Sponsored Projects Office SPO Proposal Withdrawal allows an authorized individual in the organization s SPO to initiate a proposal withdrawal and forward it to the AOR for submission to NSF. Proposal Submission Duplicate Withdrawal prevents the AOR from submitting a new proposal if a duplicate a proposal from the same organization with the same title and same PI and co PIs already has been submitted to NSF within the last two weeks prior to the current submission. If these conditions are met, the system will allow the AOR to either withdraw the previous duplicate proposal, and then proceed with the submission of the new proposal, or to modify the new proposal so it is different from the previous proposal. Authorized individuals51 can initiate or review a proposal withdrawal using the Proposal File Updates Budget Revisions function in Research.gov . In cases where NSF already has made a funding decision, proposals will not be permitted to be withdrawn via the electronic proposal withdrawal system. When a PI or other authorized official attempts to prepare a proposal withdrawal for such a proposal, a message will be displayed to contact the cognizant NSF Program Officer for further assistance. NSF must be notified if any funding for the proposed project is received from another source or sponsor. If it is brought to NSF s attention that funding for a proposal to NSF has been accepted from another sponsor, NSF will send a withdrawal confirmation to the PI and the SPO without waiting for the official withdrawal notification. If a proposal withdrawal is submitted for a proposal that is part of a collaborative effort, regardless of whether the organization is the lead or non lead, the electronic proposal withdrawal system will withdraw that proposal along with the other remaining proposals that are identified as part of the collaborative effort. If the remaining organizations in the collaborative determine that the project can still proceed, a new collaborative proposal must be submitted. Copies of reviews received by NSF before a proposal is withdrawn will be provided to the PI. NSF provides notice of a withdrawal, return, declination, or reconsideration to both the PI and the SPO. 51 AORs also can initiate a proposal withdrawal.  Proposal Award Policies Procedures Guide IV 2 NSF 23 1 B. Proposal Not Accepted or Returned Without Review A proposal will not be accepted52 or will be returned without review by NSF for the following reasons. The proposal 1. is inappropriate for funding by the National Science Foundation see Chapter I.B 2. is submitted with insufficient lead time before the activity is scheduled to begin 3. is a full proposal that was submitted by a proposer that has received a not invited response to the submission of a preliminary proposal see Chapter I.D.2. and Chapter I.D.2.a 4. is a duplicate of, or substantially similar to, a proposal already under consideration by NSF from the same submitter see Chapter I.G.2 5. does not meet NSF proposal preparation requirements, such as page limitations, formatting instructions, and electronic submission, as specified in Part I of the Proposal and Award Policies and Procedures Guide see Chapter II.A through II.D , the NSF Grants.gov Application Guide, or program solicitation 6. is not responsive to the NSF funding opportunity 7. does not meet an announced proposal deadline date 8. was previously reviewed and declined and has not been substantially revised see Chapter IV.E 9. duplicates another proposal that was already awarded and or 10. does not contain each of the required sections of the proposal, as described in Chapter II.D.2. C. Declinations A PI whose proposal for NSF support has been declined by the NSF Program Officer will receive information and an explanation of the reason s for declination along with copies of the reviews considered in making the decision. If the PI is not satisfied with that explanation, the PI may request additional information from the cognizant NSF Program Officer or Division Director. See Chapter III.G for additional information on the review information that can be provided. PIs and co PIs may access review information from NSF after the decision has received the concurrence of the cognizant NSF Division Director, when all the review information has been released for their proposal. D. Reconsideration 1. Overview a. A proposer whose proposal has been declined may ask the cognizant NSF Program Officer or the cognizant NSF Division Director for information over and above the explanatory materials received with the declination notice. If the PI is not satisfied that the proposal was fairly handled and reasonably reviewed, the PI may request reconsideration by the cognizant Assistant Director AD or Office Head. An organization still not satisfied after reconsideration by the cognizant AD Office Head may request further reconsideration by the Deputy Director of the Foundation. The decision made by the Deputy Director is final. 52 Proposal Not Accepted is defined as Research.gov will not permit submission of the proposal.  Proposal Award Policies Procedures Guide IV 3 NSF 23 1 b. If a proposal has been declined after review by the NSB, only an explanation will be available. c. The aim of any reconsideration is to ensure that NSF s review has been fair and reasonable, both substantively and procedurally. The scientific and technical merits may be examined within the context of budget availability and program priorities. Reconsideration also may address any procedural errors in peer review or other aspects of proposal review, including unaccounted for conflict of interests or inappropriate consideration of records, information, or rumor. d. Award of NSF assistance is discretionary, and reconsideration is not an adversarial process. A formal hearing, therefore, is not provided. Because factors such as program budget and priorities factor into the decision on a proposal, NSF cannot ensure proposers that reconsideration will result in an award even if error is established in connection with the initial review. e. No revisions made to the proposal after declination will be considered in connection with the original proposal. A substantially revised proposal, however, may be submitted for review as a new proposal under standard procedures. NSF reserves the right to return without review a proposal that is substantially the same as one that was previously reviewed and declined whether or not a request for reconsideration was made. 2. Applicability NSF s reconsideration process is available to individuals and organizations concerning proposals for award funding. It does not apply to a. discourage i.e., non binding decisions resulting from submission of a preliminary proposal b. proposals for 1 Fellowships 2 Travel 3 Planning 4 Rapid Response Research RAPID 5 EArly concept Grants for Exploratory Research EAGER 6 Research Advanced by Interdisciplinary Science and Engineering RAISE 7 Phase I proposals submitted under the Small Business Innovation Research SBIR program and 8 Phase I proposals submitted under the Small Business Technology Transfer STTR program. c. proposals returned without review by NSF for failure to 1 be submitted with sufficient lead time before the activity is to begin 2 meet an announced proposal deadline date or 3 meet NSF proposal preparation requirements, such as page limitations, formatting instructions, and electronic submission, as specified in Part I of the PAPPG, the NSF Grants.gov Application Guide, or program solicitation. 3. Reconsideration Process The following paragraphs highlight the various stages of the NSF Reconsideration Process, including the necessary procedural aspects of each stage of the process.  Proposal Award Policies Procedures Guide IV 4 NSF 23 1 a. Explanations by the NSF Program Officer or Division Director When a proposal is declined, the PI receives verbatim but unattributed copies of any ad hoc reviews and the panel summary if applicable , a description of how the proposal was reviewed, and, if not otherwise provided in the panel summary, an explanation written or telephoned of the basis for the declination. A returned proposal also will be accompanied by an explanation. A PI who is considering asking for reconsideration should first contact the cognizant NSF Program Officer or Division Director, who will afford the PI an informal opportunity to seek further clarification. b. Reconsideration by the Cognizant NSF Assistant Director 1 If dissatisfied with the explanation provided by the NSF Program Officer or Division Director, the PI may request in writing that NSF reconsider its action. Such a request will be considered only if the PI has first sought and obtained further clarification from the cognizant NSF Program Officer or Division Director, and only if the request is received by the Foundation within 90 days after the declination or the return. The request should be addressed to the AD Office Head for the Directorate or Office that handled the proposal and should explain why the PI believes that the declination or return was unwarranted. 2 The AD Office Head will reconsider the record to determine whether NSF s review of the declined proposal was fair and reasonable, substantively and procedurally, taking into account availability of funds and the policies and priorities of the program and NSF. In the case of a returned proposal, the record will be reviewed to determine whether the proposed project was inappropriate for NSF consideration. The AD Office Head may request additional information from the PI and may obtain additional reviews. If additional reviews are sought, they are subject to standard review procedures e.g., instructions must be provided to reviewers and conflicts of interest policies must be followed . The AD Office Head may conduct the reconsideration personally or may designate another NSF official who had no part in the initial review to do so. As used here, AD Office Head includes such a designated official. 3 Within 45 days after the date of the request, the AD Office Head will furnish the results of the reconsideration, in writing, to the PI. If results cannot be furnished within 45 days, the AD Office Head will send the PI a written explanation of the need for more time, indicating the date when the results can be expected. If the AD Office Head reaffirms the declination or return, the AD Office Head will inform the PI that the PI s organization may obtain further reconsideration by the Deputy Director of NSF as provided below. c. Further Reconsideration by the NSF Deputy Director 1 Within 60 days after the AD Office Head has notified the PI of the results of the reconsideration, the proposing organization may request further reconsideration by the Deputy Director of NSF. 2 A request for further reconsideration need not be in any particular format, but it must be in writing, and must be signed by the organization s president or other chief executive officer and by the PI. For declinations, it should explain why the organization believes that an error may have occurred in the initial evaluation and why it is not entirely satisfied with the reconsideration by the cognizant AD Office Head. For returned proposals, it should explain why the organization believes that an error may have occurred in the initial determination that the proposal was inappropriate for NSF consideration. 3 The Deputy Director will review the request for further reconsideration and the record of earlier NSF actions, including the original review and the reconsideration by the AD Office Head, to determine whether NSF s review of the declined proposal was fair and reasonable, or, in the case of a returned proposal, whether the proposed project was inappropriate for NSF consideration. The Deputy Director may request additional information from the PI or the proposing organization and may obtain additional reviews. If additional reviews are sought, they are subject to standard review procedures e.g., instructions must be provided to reviewers and conflicts of interest policies must be followed .  Proposal Award Policies Procedures Guide IV 5 NSF 23 1 4 The Deputy Director may conduct the further reconsideration personally or may designate another NSF official who had no part in the initial evaluation of the proposal or the earlier reconsideration to do so. As used here, Deputy Director includes such a designated official. 5 Within 30 days after a request for further reconsideration is received at NSF, the Deputy Director will furnish the results of the further reconsideration, in writing, to the organization. If results cannot be furnished within 30 days, the Deputy Director will send the organization a written explanation of the need for more time, indicating the date when the results can be expected. 6 The decision made by the Deputy Director is final. E. Resubmission A declined proposal may be resubmitted, but only after it has undergone substantial revision. NSF programs that accept proposals at any time may have established guidelines in which a declined proposal or reasonable facsimile of that proposal topic by the same PI, and co PIs, where applicable is ineligible for resubmission for a specified period of time. This moratorium allows PIs co PIs sufficient time to digest the results of the merit review and revise restructure the declined proposal accordingly. Please note that a proposal that the program considers too similar to a previous proposal that is under the moratorium period may be returned without review. A resubmitted proposal that has not clearly taken into account the major comments or concerns resulting from the prior NSF review may be returned without review. The Foundation will treat the revised proposal as a new proposal, subject to the standard review procedures.  Proposal Award Policies Procedures Guide V 1 NSF 23 1 Chapter V Renewal Proposals A renewal proposal is a request for additional funding for a support period subsequent to that provided by a standard or continuing grant. A renewal proposal competes with all other proposals and must be developed as fully as though the proposer is applying for the first time. Renewal proposals must be submitted at least six months before additional funding is required or consistent with an established deadline, target date or submission window. In preparing a renewal proposal, proposers should assume that reviewers will not have access to previously submitted versions of the proposal. Please note the National Science Board affirms that merit reviewed competition is the foundation for the NSF s grant award making process so there should be a presumption that expiring awards are to be recompeted.54 All proposals for renewed support of research projects, from academic institutions only, must include information on human resources development at the postdoctoral, graduate, and undergraduate levels as part of Results from Prior NSF Support.55 This may involve, but is not limited to, the role of research in student training, course preparation and seminars particularly for undergraduates . Special accomplishments in the development of professional scientists and engineers from underrepresented groups should be described. Graduate students who participated in the research should be identified by name. This requirement does not apply to non academic organizations. PIs are encouraged to discuss renewal proposals with the program prior to submission of a proposal. Unless precluded by individual program requirements, PIs may choose either of the following two formats for preparation of a renewal proposal. A. Traditional Renewal. The traditional renewal proposal is developed as fully as though the proposer were applying for the first time. It covers all the information required in a proposal for a new project, including Results from Prior NSF Support. The 15 page limitation on the Project Description applies. B. Accomplishment Based Renewal. In an Accomplishment Based Renewal ABR proposal, the Project Description including the Results from Prior NSF Support is replaced with the following items 1. a brief summary not to exceed four pages of plans for the proposed support period. 2. information on human resources development at the postdoctoral, graduate, and undergraduate levels and 3. copies of no more than six reprints56 of publications resulting from the research supported by NSF including research supported by other sources that is closely related to the NSF supported research during the preceding period of NSF support. Of the six publications, two preprints accepted for publication may be included. All other information required for NSF proposal submission remains the same. 54Reference National Science Board Policy Statement NSB 2015 45 on Recompetition of Major Facilities and Resolution NSB 2015 46 entitled, Recompetition of Ongoing Facilities. For the operation of a major facility, the National Science Board has endorsed the principle that NSF should perform a rigorous review prior to the end date of an award to determine whether it is in the best interest of US science and engineering to recompete that award. 55This requirement applies to both types of renewal proposals Traditional Renewal and Accomplishment Based Renewal. 56Reprints should be provided as supplementary documentation and should be submitted via the Proposal Preparation Module in Research.gov.  Proposal Award Policies Procedures Guide V 2 NSF 23 1 It must be clearly indicated in the proposal that it is an ABR submission and the box for Accomplishment Based Renewal must be checked on the Cover Sheet. ABR proposals may not be submitted for consecutive renewals. PIs are advised that the ABR is a special type of renewal proposal appropriate only for an investigator who has made significant contributions, over a number of years, in the area of research addressed by the proposal. Investigators are strongly urged to contact the cognizant NSF Program Officer prior to developing a proposal using this format. Descriptions of other forms of additional funding support, including continuing grants and supplemental funding requests, are contained in Chapter VI.  Proposal Award Policies Procedures Guide VI 1 NSF 23 1 Part II Award, Administration and Monitoring of NSF Assistance Awards Part II of the NSF Proposal Award Policies Procedures Guide sets forth NSF guidance regarding the award, administration, and monitoring of grants and cooperative agreements. Coverage includes the NSF award process, from issuance and administration of an NSF award through closeout. Guidance is provided regarding other requirements or considerations that either are not universally applicable or do not follow the award cycle. Part II also implements other Public Laws, Executive Orders E.O. and other directives insofar as they apply to grants and is issued pursuant to the authority of Section 11 a of the NSF Act 42 USC 1870 . When NSF award terms and conditions or an award notice reference a particular section of the PAPPG, then that section becomes part of the award requirements through incorporation by reference. Chapter VI NSF Awards A. Acceptance of Assistance Agreements Recipients are free to accept or reject the award. Normally, a request to drawdown NSF funds constitutes acceptance, however, in limited circumstances, NSF may require formal acceptance of an award. If the recipient chooses not to accept the award, then a written request should be sent to the cognizant NSF Program Officer to withdraw or terminate the award. B. Award Instrument 1. Composition of an NSF Award Composition of an NSF award includes a. the award notice, including any special conditions applicable to the award and any numbered amendments thereto b. general Federal award information as required by 2 CFR 200.210 c. the budget, which indicates the amounts, by categories of expense, on which NSF has based its support d. the applicable NSF general conditions referenced in the award notice e. the proposal referenced in the award notice and f. any NSF program announcement, program solicitation or other documents or special requirements incorporated by reference in the award notice. 2. Award Transmission NSF transmits award notices to organizations via e mail. In addition to the e mail notification, grantees and PIs also may access NSF award notices via use of Research.gov. SPOs are able to view, print and or download NSF award notices for their organizations. C. NSF Award Conditions Each NSF award notice specifically identifies certain conditions that are applicable to, and become part of, that award. The award conditions are available on the NSF website. When these conditions reference a  Proposal Award Policies Procedures Guide VI 2 NSF 23 1 particular PAPPG section, that section becomes part of the award requirements through incorporation by reference. D. NSF Award Periods 1. Definitions a. Start Date is the date specified in the award notice on or after which, except for fixed amount awards, expenditures may be charged to the award. With the exception of PI transfers, the start date used by NSF is either the 1st or the 15th day of the month. If no start date is specified, then the date of the award notice is the start date. For pre award expenditures, Chapter X.A.2.b. b. End Date is the date specified in the award notice after which expenditures may not be charged against the award except to satisfy obligations to pay allowable project costs committed on or before that date. The end date is the last day of a month. c. Award Date is the date when the NSF award is signed by the cognizant NSF Grants and Agreements Officer. d. Budget period is the time interval from the start date of a funded portion of an NSF award to the end date of that funded portion during which the recipient is authorized to expend the funds awarded, including any funds carried forward or other revisions pursuant to 2 CFR 200.308. e. Award Period is the period of time between the start date and the end date of an NSF award shown as the duration. 2. Significance of Award Period a. An NSF award gives authority to the recipient to commit and expend funds in support of the project up to the award amount specified in the award notice at any time during the award period. b. Except as provided in Chapter X.A.2.b or Chapter X.A.2.c, expenditures may not be charged prior to the start date or subsequent to the end date under an NSF cost reimbursement award. 3. Changes in an Award Period a. Start Date Once an award is made, the start date cannot be changed however, recipients have the authority to incur pre award costs as outlined in Chapter X.A.2.b. b. End Date The end date may be changed for a no cost extension, or by approval of a request for supplemental support up to six additional months in accordance with Section E.4. below . When appropriate, the NSF Grants and Agreements Officer will issue an amendment to the award. c. No Cost Extension i Grantee Approved Extension.57 Grantees may authorize a one time extension of the end date of the grant of up to 12 months if additional time beyond the established end date is required to assure adequate completion of the original scope of work within the funds already made available. This one time extension may not be exercised merely for the purpose of using the unliquidated balances. Recipients are not authorized to extend an award that contains a zero balance. The recipient shall notify NSF, providing 57 NSF cooperative agreements are not eligible for grantee approved no cost extensions.  Proposal Award Policies Procedures Guide VI 3 NSF 23 1 supporting reasons for the extension and the revised period of performance, at least ten calendar days prior to the end date specified in the grant to ensure accuracy of NSF s grant data. All grantee approved extension notifications must be signed and submitted by the AOR via use of NSF s electronic systems. For grantee approved extensions, no amendment will be issued. The revised end date may be viewed via NSF s electronic systems. ii NSF Approved Extension a If additional time beyond the extension provided by the grantee is required and exceptional circumstances warrant, a formal request must be signed and submitted by the AOR via use of NSF s electronic systems. The request should be submitted to NSF at least 45 days prior to the end date of the grant. All late requests must include a strong justification as to why it was not submitted earlier. The request must explain the need for the extension and include an estimate of the unobligated funds remaining and a plan for their use. That unobligated funds may remain at the end of the grant is not in itself sufficient justification for an extension. The plan must adhere to the previously approved objectives of the project. Such requests must be signed and submitted by the AOR via use of NSF s electronic systems. NSF will not extend an award that contains a zero balance. b The first no cost extension request will be considered for approval by the cognizant NSF Program Officer. The grantee and the PI will be electronically notified of the disposition of this request by the cognizant NSF Program Officer an amendment to the grant will not be issued . The second or any subsequent no cost extension request will be subject to the approval of an NSF Grants and Agreements Officer, and, if approved, will be in the form of an amendment to the grant specifying a new end date. Recipients are cautioned not to make new commitments or incur new expenditures after the end date of the award in anticipation of a no cost extension. In addition, recipients must be aware that most NSF appropriated funds have a limited period of availability for expenditure before the appropriation cancels. No cost extensions do not extend the period of availability for canceling funds58. d. Two Year Extensions for Special Creativity A Program Officer may recommend the extension of funding for certain research grants beyond the initial period for which the grant was awarded for a period of up to two years. The objective of such extensions is to offer the most creative investigators an extended opportunity to attack adventurous, high risk opportunities in the same general research area, but not necessarily covered by the original current award. Grants eligible for such an extension are generally continuing grants. Special Creativity Extensions are normally initiated by the NSF Program Officer based on progress during the first two years of the grant PIs will be informed of such action a year in advance of the end date of the award. In response to the Program Officer s recommendation, the required information must be signed and submitted by the AOR via use of NSF s electronic systems. E. Additional Funding Support 1. Types of Additional Funding Support Additional funding of a project beyond the original award amount awarded will be in the form of renewed support, continuing grant or cooperative agreement increments or supplemental support. A description of each of these additional funding mechanisms is provided below. 58 In accordance with 31 USC 1552 a , funds will no longer be available for expenditure for any purpose beyond September 30th of the fifth fiscal year after the expiration of a fixed appropriation s period of availability for incurring new obligations see also Chapter VIII.E for Financial Requirements and Payments.  Proposal Award Policies Procedures Guide VI 4 NSF 23 1 2. Renewed Support As defined in 2 CFR 200.1, Renewal award means an award made subsequent to an expiring NSF award for which the start date is contiguous with, or closely follows, the end of the expiring NSF award. A renewal award s start date will begin a distinct period of performance. Generally, costs incurred under the old award cannot be transferred to the new award. Residual funds remaining in the old award cannot be transferred to the new award. Instructions for preparation of renewal proposals are contained in Chapters II and V. 3. Support under Continuing Grants a. Funding increments for projects being supported under continuing grants receive high priority within NSF and normally are not considered in competition with proposals for new grants or for grants for renewed support. b. Unless otherwise provided for in the original award notice, each increment of a continuing grant will be funded at the level indicated in the original award notice without a formal request, subject to NSF s judgment of satisfactory progress, availability of funds, and receipt and approval of the required annual report. NSF makes every attempt to honor continuing grant commitments. In order to adjust to changes in the general level of funds for a particular field of science or engineering or to major new opportunities in that field, however, NSF may reduce continuing grant increments below the levels indicated in the original award notice. This requires full written justification by program staff and management review and approval. In the absence of major unanticipated fiscal year constraints, reductions are rare. Continuing grant increments will be released by the cognizant NSF Program Officer upon approval of the annual project report. The SPO and PI will be notified by the cognizant NSF Program Officer of NSF s approval via email. c. In order to obtain a committed funding increment and ensure continuity of funding, an annual project report must be submitted by the PI via use of Research.gov and approved by the NSF Program Officer prior to the end of the current budget period. See Chapter VII.D for additional information on submission of project reports . 4. Cooperative Agreement Increments a. Unlike continuing grants, funding increments for projects being supported under cooperative agreements CA or cooperative support agreements CSA are recommended for funding by the cognizant NSF Program Officer in accordance with the terms and conditions of the CA, which may be based on the original budget or submission of a revised budget via email or as directed. b. Continued funding is subject to NSF s judgment of satisfactory progress, including milestones or other requirements of the CA or CSA, availability of funds, and receipt and approval of the required annual report, and, if required by the award, the annual cost sharing certification. 5. Supplemental Support a. In unusual circumstances, small amounts of supplemental funding and up to six months of additional support may be requested to assure adequate completion of the original scope of work. Such requests for supplemental funding support must be signed and submitted by the AOR via use of NSF s electronic systems at least two months prior to the need for the additional funds and must be adequately justified. Program Officers may make decisions regarding whether or not to recommend a small supplement without merit review of the supplemental request. Requests for larger supplements may require external merit review. b. A request for supplemental support must be submitted electronically via Research.gov and must include  Proposal Award Policies Procedures Guide VI 5 NSF 23 1 i A summary of the proposed work ii A justification of the need for the supplemental funds and iii A budget and budget justification, highlighting the use by budget category of the additional funding as distinguished from the original funding provided in those categories of cost. AORs are required to electronically sign the supplemental funding request via the Authorized Organizational Representative Functions in Research.gov. c. NSF will not approve requests for supplemental support for such purposes as defraying the costs of increases in salaries, wages or staff benefits or for additional indirect cost F A reimbursement, whether caused by a change in the indirect cost rate or by changes in direct cost expenditures which affect the indirect cost base. See Chapter X.A.2.a. d. If approved, the NSF Grants and Agreements Officer will amend the award to provide additional funding for the current support period. The amendment notice will specify both the amount of supplemental funding and the cumulative amount awarded through the end date, which normally will remain unchanged. Recipients are reminded that most NSF appropriated funds have a limited period of availability for expenditure before the appropriation cancels.59 Any extensions of the end date due to award of supplemental funding does not extend the period of availability for canceling funds of the original award. e. Special NSF programs such as Research Experiences for Undergraduates may provide their funding through supplements to other NSF grants. In such instances, the guidance in this section may not be applicable. Please see the applicable NSF funding opportunity for the relevant guidance. 59 In accordance with 31 USC 1552 a , funds will no longer be available for expenditure for any purpose beyond September 30th of the fifth fiscal year after the expiration of a fixed appropriation s period of availability for incurring new obligations see also PAPPG Chapter VIII.E.  Proposal Award Policies Procedures Guide VII 1 NSF 23 1 Chapter VII Award Administration A. Monitoring Project Performance 1. Recipient Responsibilities a. The recipient has full responsibility for the conduct of the project or activity supported under an NSF award and for the results achieved. The recipient should monitor the performance of the project to assure adherence to performance goals, time schedules or other requirements as appropriate to the project or the terms and conditions of the award. In order to carry out these responsibilities, each recipient organization shall agree to comply with the applicable Federal requirements for awards and to the prudent management of all expenditures and actions affecting the award. Documentation for each expenditure or action affecting the award shall reflect appropriate organizational reviews or approvals, which should be made in advance of the action. Organizational reviews are intended to help assure that expenditures are allowable, necessary, and reasonable for the conduct of the project, and that the proposed action i is consistent with award terms and conditions ii is consistent with NSF and recipient policies iii represents effective utilization of resources and iv does not constitute changes in objectives or scope. b. Notwithstanding these responsibilities, NSF continues to encourage communication between NSF Program Officers and PIs on the progress of projects supported by NSF as well as on project changes. c. NSF, through authorized representatives, has the right, at all reasonable times, to make site visits to review project accomplishments, recipient management control systems and administration and management of the award and to provide technical assistance as may be required. If any site visit is made by the Foundation on the premises of the recipient or a subrecipient under an award, the recipient shall provide and shall require its subrecipients to provide all reasonable facilities and assistance for the safety and convenience of the NSF representatives. 2. Recipient Notifications to NSF The following is a listing of recipient notifications to NSF, including a reference to where additional guidance is provided. Except where noted below, all notifications must be submitted via use of NSF s electronic systems. With the exception of significant changes in methods or procedures and significant changes, delays or events of unusual interest, all notifications must be signed and submitted by the AOR. a. Grantee Approved No Cost Extension See Chapter VI.D.3.c i . b. Significant Changes in Methods or Procedures Other than Changes in Objectives or Scope See Chapter VII.B.1.b. c. Significant Changes, Delays or Events of Unusual Interest Other than Changes in Objectives or Scope See Chapter VII.B.1.c. d. Annual and Final Cost Share Notification by Recipient See Chapter VII.C.3. e. Conflicts of Interest that cannot be satisfactorily managed, reduced or eliminated and research that proceeds without the imposition of conditions or restrictions when a conflict of interest exists See Chapter IX.A.  Proposal Award Policies Procedures Guide VII 2 NSF 23 1 f. Finding Determination that a PI or co PI has been found to have violated awardee policies or codes of conduct, statutes, regulations, or executive orders relating to sexual harassment, other forms of harassment, or sexual assault See Chapter XI.A.1. This notification must be submitted through use of NSF s Office of Equity and Civil Rights website or g. Placement by the recipient of a PI or co PI on administrative leave or the imposition of any administrative action on the PI or any co PI by the awardee relating to any finding determination or an investigation of an alleged violation of awardee policies or codes of conduct, statutes, regulations, or executive orders relating to sexual harassment, other forms of harassment, or sexual assault. See Chapter XI.A.1. This notification must be submitted through use of NSF s Office of Equity and Civil Rights website. Certain actions require prior approval from NSF. Guidance regarding prior approval requirements is covered in Chapter X.A.3, and the NSF column of the Research Terms and Conditions, Appendix A. B. Changes in Project Direction or Management 1. Changes in Objectives, Scope, or Methods Procedures a. Changes in Objectives or Scope The objectives or scope of the project may not be changed without prior NSF approval. Such change requests must be signed and submitted by the AOR via use of NSF s electronic systems. If approved by NSF, the Grants and Agreements Officer will amend the award. Prior written NSF approval also is required for changes to the Facilities, Equipment and Other Resources section of the approved proposal that would constitute changes in objectives or scope see Chapter II.D.2.g for further information . b. Significant Changes in Methods or Procedures NSF believes that the PI and co PI, operating within the established policies of the recipient organization, should feel free to pursue interesting and important leads that may arise during the conduct of a research or other award supported project or to adopt an alternative approach which appears to be a more promising means of achieving the objectives of the project. Significant changes in methods or procedures should be reported to appropriate recipient official s . The PI also must notify NSF via use of NSF s electronic systems. c. Significant Changes, Delays, or Events of Unusual Interest In the event there are problems, delays, or adverse conditions that will materially impact the ability to attain the objectives of the project or to meet such time schedules as may have been proposed, the PI should notify the appropriate recipient official s . The PI also must notify NSF via use of NSF s electronic systems. NSF should be informed of any events of unusual interest that occur during the course of the project. Reports, communications, or photographs should be submitted via the interim report capability in Research.gov. 2. Changes in PI, co PI, or Person Months Devoted to the Project at the Initiation of the Recipient Organization The NSF decision to support a proposed project is based to a considerable extent upon its evaluation of the proposed PI and any identified co PI s knowledge of the field of study and their capabilities to conduct the project in an efficient and productive manner. This is reflected in the NSF merit review criteria see Chapter III . The named PI and co PI should be continuously responsible for the conduct of the project and be closely involved with the effort. If the recipient determines that there is a need for the addition of a new co PI, or the current PI or co PI plans to, or becomes aware that the current PI or co PI will i devote substantially less effort to the project than anticipated in the approved proposal ii sever connection with the recipient organization or iii otherwise relinquish active  Proposal Award Policies Procedures Guide VII 3 NSF 23 1 direction of the project, the individual must advise the appropriate official at the recipient organization, who shall initiate action appropriate to the situation under the guidelines that follow. a. Long Term Disengagement of PI or co PI i In the event the PI or co PI will be disengaged from the project for a period greater than three months e.g., sabbatical leave but intends to return, arrangements for oversight of the project must be signed and submitted by the AOR via use of NSF s electronic systems. This request must be submitted at least 30 days before departure or as soon as practicable after the prospective disengagement is known.62 The cognizant NSF Program Officer will provide written approval to the recipient if the arrangements are satisfactory, but no formal amendment to the award will be made. If the arrangements are not satisfactory to NSF, the award may be terminated as prescribed in Chapter XII.A. ii In the event the PI or co PI will temporarily be working for NSF as an IPA Intergovernmental Personnel Act employee or VSEE Visiting Scientist, Engineer or Educator , the appropriate officials at the recipient organization must contact the cognizant NSF Program Officer for procedural guidance regarding any existing awards or pending proposals of the PI or co PI. b. Changes in Person Months Devoted to the Project If the PI or co PI will devote substantially less time to the project than anticipated in the approved proposal, defined in the applicable award terms and conditions as a reduction of 25 or more in time that PI or co PI should consult with the appropriate officials of the recipient organization. Requests for changes to the person months devoted to the project must be signed and submitted by the AOR via use of NSF s electronic systems. This request must be submitted at least 30 days before the proposed change, or as soon as practicable after the prospective change is known. If the recipient organization or NSF determines that the reduction of effort will substantially impair the successful execution of the project, the NSF Program Officer will consult the NSF Grants and Agreements Officer. The NSF Grants and Agreements Officer may i request the recipient to nominate a replacement PI or co PI acceptable to the cognizant NSF Program Officer ii initiate the termination procedures described in Chapter XII.A. or iii negotiate an appropriate modification to the award. c. Addition of co PI In the event the recipient desires to add a new co PI to a project63, the AOR must sign and submit the request via use of NSF s electronic systems. The new co PI s name, biographical sketch, current and pending support from all ongoing projects and proposals, as well as a justification for the addition must also be included in the request. The contact information for the new co PI also should be included. If approved by NSF, the Grants and Agreements Officer will amend the award. d. Withdrawal of PI or co PI In the event the PI or co PI severs connection with the recipient organization or otherwise relinquishes active direction of the project, the AOR must sign and submit a notification of the withdrawal of the PI or co PI via Research.gov. This request must be submitted at least 30 days before the proposed change, or as soon as practicable after the prospective withdrawal is known. The recipient also must i initiate transfer of the award as described in Chapter VII.B.2.f. This is generally reserved for the withdrawal of the PI 62 A shorter period is provided in situations falling under Chapter XI.A.1.g. 63 NSF s policy limits the number of co PIs to four per award.  Proposal Award Policies Procedures Guide VII 4 NSF 23 1 ii nominate a substitute as described in Chapter VII.B.2.e or iii initiate award closeout procedures through submission of final reports as described in Chapter VII.D.2. This is generally reserved for the withdrawal of the PI if no substitute is nominated . e. Substitute Change PI or co PI In the event the recipient desires to continue the project with a substitute PI or co PI, the AOR must sign and submit the request via use of NSF s electronic systems. The substitute PI s name or co PI s name, biographical sketch, current and pending support from all ongoing projects and proposals, as well as a justification for the substitution must also be included in the request. The contact information for the substitute PI or co PI also should be included. If approved by NSF, the Grants and Agreements Officer will amend the award. If not approved, NSF may take steps, pursuant to Chapter XII.A to suspend or terminate the award. In cases where a former NSF employee or IPA is being reappointed as PI or co PI to an award they were previously involved with, the recipient must submit a Change of PI request using the Research.gov Notifications and Requests module. The change in PI request should include documentation from the AOR designating a substitute negotiator for that award under the Associated Documents section. A co PI request should designate the PI as the substitute negotiator. f. Disposition of an Award When a PI Transfers from One Organization to Another Organization i Policy. When a PI plans to leave an organization during the course of a award, the organization has the prerogative to nominate a substitute PI or request that the award be terminated and closed out. In those cases where the PI s original and new organizations agree, NSF will facilitate a transfer of the award and the assignment of remaining unobligated funds to the PI s new organization. This should normally be done with a tripartite agreement involving NSF, the PI s original organization and new organization , or by a subaward arrangement between the PI s original and new organizations, subject to NSF s consent. See Chapter VII.B.3 ii Procedures. When a PI plans to leave an organization during the course of an award, the PI or the SPO, shall notify the cognizant NSF Program Officer. If the project is to continue with the original organization, the cognizant NSF Program Officer should advise the recipient to nominate a substitute PI see Chapter VII.B.2.e . If the project is to be continued at the PI s new organization, and if NSF and both organizations agree, formal notification of the impending transfer can be electronically initiated by either the PI or the PI s organization. The amount transferred has to be equal to or less than the unobligated balance. The request shall include a a brief summary of progress to date b description of work yet to be accomplished c completed on line transfer request, including total disbursements and unpaid obligations to date transfer amount will be automatically calculated, based on the amount entered in total disbursements . The original organization is responsible for including in the total estimated disbursements, any anticipated costs yet to be incurred against the original award d detailed line item budget for the transfer amount and any outstanding award increments and e If funding is requested to support a postdoctoral researcher, then the request must include the requisite mentoring plan as described in Chapter II.D.2.i i . The plan must be uploaded under Mentoring Plan in the Supplementary Documentation section of Research.gov. The PI must report on the mentoring activities provided to the individual s in annual and final project reports. The original organization concurs with the transfer of the award by electronically forwarding the request to the new organization. The new organization completes the request by providing a detailed budget for the transfer amount agreed to by both organizations. The AOR of the new organization must sign and submit the request via use of NSF s electronic  Proposal Award Policies Procedures Guide VII 5 NSF 23 1 systems. Submission of the request constitutes agreement by the new organization to assume responsibility for completion of the project effort and to administer the award as originally awarded from the transfer date to completion in accordance with any special terms and conditions and the applicable general terms and conditions that normally govern NSF awards made to the new organization. Special terms and conditions, as appropriate, cited in the original award will convey to the new recipient organization. NSF will assign a proposal number at the time of submission. This proposal number will become the new award number when the transfer is approved by an NSF Grants and Agreements Officer. iii Fund Transfer. Upon receipt of the above material, NSF will review the request and, if approved, deduct the specified transfer amount from the original award and re establish it under a new award number at the new organization. Award notification by the NSF Grants and Agreements Officer will constitute NSF approval of the award transfer. The award notification also will specify the applicable award terms and conditions that govern the award. iv Monetary Discrepancies. Upon transfer of the award to the new organization, any monetary discrepancies must be resolved between the original and the new recipient. NSF will not intervene in any disputes between the two organizations regarding the transferred amount. v Equipment Transfers. Equipment purchased with NSF funds for use in a specific project should remain available for use for the duration of the project. PIs who are in the midst of projects that included funding for equipment and who will continue the project at a new organization with NSF support, should arrange with their original organization to have the equipment transferred with them. Shipping costs for such equipment may be charged to the original or transferred award as an allowable cost. Budgets should not include funds to buy equipment that had been previously obtained with Federal funds. vi Possible Alternatives to the Transfer Process. When the amount of time and funds remaining in a project are modest, and if both the original and new organizations are in agreement, the original organization may issue a subaward to the new organization for completion of the project. This and other possible alternatives should be discussed with the NSF Grants and Agreements Officer. 3. Changes in PI, co PI, or Person Months Devoted to the Project at the Initiation of NSF a. Upon receipt of a notification specified in Chapter VII.A.2.f or g, NSF will consider, at a minimum, the following factors i The safety and security of personnel supported by the NSF award ii The overall impact to the NSF funded activity iii The continued advancement of taxpayer funded investments in science and scientists and iv Whether the awardee has taken appropriate action s to ensure the continuity of science and that continued progress under the funded project can be made. b. Upon receipt and review of the information provided, NSF will consult with the AOR, or designee. Based on the results of this review and consultation, the Foundation may, if necessary, assert its programmatic stewardship responsibilities and oversight authority, to initiate the substitution or removal of the PI or any co PI, reduce the award funding amount, or where neither of those previous options is available or adequate, to suspend or terminate the award. c. When NSF invokes this authority, the recipient must nominate a substitute PI or co PI via use of NSF s electronic systems. The substitute PI s name or co PI s name, biographical sketch, current and pending support from all ongoing projects and proposals, must also be included in the request. The contact information for the substitute PI or co PI also should be included. If approved by NSF, the Grants and Agreements Officer will amend  Proposal Award Policies Procedures Guide VII 6 NSF 23 1 the award. If not approved, or a substitute PI or co PI is not available, NSF may take steps, pursuant to Chapter XII.A to suspend or terminate the award. 4. Subawarding or Transferring Part of an NSF Award Subaward 64 Excluding the purchase of items such as commercially available materials and supplies, equipment, or general support services allowable under the award, no part of an NSF award may be subawarded or transferred to another organization without prior NSF authorization. The intent to enter into such arrangements should be disclosed in the proposal. If it becomes necessary to subaward or transfer part of an NSF award after an award has been made, the recipient shall submit, at a minimum a. a clear description of the work to be performed by each subrecipient b. a separate budget and budget justification for each subaward and c. If funding is requested to support a postdoctoral researcher, and the original proposal did not include a mentoring plan, then the request must include the requisite mentoring plan as described in Chapter II.C.2.j. The plan must be uploaded under Mentoring Plan in the Supplementary Documentation section of Research.gov. The request must be signed and submitted by the AOR via use of NSF s electronic systems, and NSF authorization will be indicated by an amendment to the award signed by the Grants and Agreements Officer. The NSF award terms and conditions will identify which articles flow down to subrecipients. Procurements under NSF awards are subject to Chapter X.C as well as 2 CFR 200.317 327. 5. Postaward Additions of Postdoctoral Scholars If a recipient rebudgets funds to support a postdoctoral researcher and the original proposal included a mentoring plan, no further documentation is necessary. If the original proposal did not include a mentoring plan, then the recipient must send the cognizant NSF Program Officer the requisite mentoring plan, as described in Chapter II.D.2i i . If supplemental funding is requested to support a postdoctoral researcher and the original proposal did not include a mentoring plan, then the supplemental funding request must include the requisite mentoring plan, as described in Chapter II.D.2.i i . The plan should be uploaded to the Other Supplementary Documents section of the Research.gov Supplemental Funding Request module. In all cases, the PI must report on the mentoring activities provided to the individual in the annual and final project reports. C. Cost Sharing 1. General The National Science Board issued a report entitled Investing in the Future NSF Cost Sharing Policies for a Robust Federal Research Enterprise NSB 09 20 , which contained eight recommendations for NSF regarding cost sharing. In implementation of the Board s recommendations, NSF s revised guidance65 see Chapter II.D.2.f xii is as follows inclusion of voluntary committed cost sharing is prohibited. It should be noted that foregoing full indirect cost rate F A recovery is considered voluntary committed cost sharing and 64In the rare case of funding to a foreign organization or foreign individual, see Chapter I.E.2 for additional requirements. 65 See NSF s Revised Cost Sharing Policy Statement for the Foundation s overarching policies on cost sharing.  Proposal Award Policies Procedures Guide VII 7 NSF 23 1 when mandatory cost sharing is included on Line M and accepted by NSF, the commitment of funds becomes legally binding and is subject to audit. Failure to provide the level of cost sharing required by the NSF solicitation and reflected in the NSF award budget may result in termination of the NSF award, disallowance of award costs and or refund of award funds to NSF by the recipient. 2. Mandatory Cost Sharing Commitments 2 CFR 200.306 prescribes criteria and procedures for the allowability of cash and in kind contributions. Recipients should be aware that mandatory cost sharing commitments are subject to audit. Audit findings involving cost sharing have pertained to a failure to keep adequate source documentation for claimed cost sharing b unclear valuation of in kind donated contributions c lack of support for cost sharing contributions by subrecipients and d failure to complete annual certifications for awards with mandatory cost sharing requirements. Additional guidance on cost sharing is available on the NSF website. 3. Mandatory Cost Sharing Records and Reports a. Recipient Records Recipients shall maintain records of all project costs that are claimed by the recipient to meet mandatory cost sharing requirements specified in an NSF program solicitation. Records for cost share contributed to NSF awards must be compliant with the requirements of 2 CFR 200.306 and are subject to audit. b. Recipient Reports The amount of mandatory cost sharing must be documented on an annual and final basis , certified by the AOR, and reported to the cognizant NSF Program Officer via use of NSF s electronic systems. Such notifications must be submitted no later than 90 days prior to the end of the current budget period to meet the annual notification requirement, and no later than 120 days following the end date of the of the award to meet the final notification requirement. The cost share notification is considered due during the 90 or 120 day period respectively. The notification becomes overdue the day after the respective 90 or 120 day period ends. c. Changes to the Cost Sharing Amount Specified on Line M of the NSF Award Budget Should the recipient become aware that it may be unable to provide the cost sharing of at least the amount identified on Line M of the NSF award budget, the AOR must immediately sign and submit a request to revise the agreed upon cost sharing amount and submit the request via use of the Other category in the Notification and Request module of NSF s electronic systems. The request must provide a description of why the cost sharing amount cannot be provided, and either indicate steps the recipient plans to take to secure replacement cost sharing or indicate the plans that the recipient has to either continue or phase out the project in the absence of the approved level of cost sharing. Should NSF agree to the organization s proposed plans, the NSF Grants and Agreements Officer will modify the award accordingly, including, if appropriate, reducing the amount of NSF support. Should the organization s plans be unacceptable to NSF, the award may be subject to termination. NSF modifications to proposed cost sharing revisions are made on a case by case basis. Failure by the organization to notify NSF, in accordance with the paragraph above, may result in the disallowance of some or all of the costs charged to the award the subsequent recovery by NSF of some or all of the NSF funds provided under the award possible termination of the award and may constitute a violation of the terms of the award so serious as to provide grounds for subsequent suspension or debarment. D. Technical Reporting Requirements NSF requires project reports for all assistance awards. Information from these reports is used in annual reports to Congress to demonstrate the Foundation s performance as mandated by the Government Performance and Results Act GPRA of 1993. These reports also provide NSF program officers and administrative offices with  Proposal Award Policies Procedures Guide VII 8 NSF 23 1 information on the progress of supported projects and the way these funds are used. Information in these reports may be made available to the general public through the Freedom of Information Act FOIA . These reports are fully consistent with the Research Performance Progress Report RPPR , which is the government wide standard for use with research and research related activities. As implemented, the following components comprise NSF project reports Accomplishments Products Participants Organizations Impact Changes Problems and Special Requirement if applicable . Except where another format is approved by OMB for use by an NSF program, this means that the where practicable requirement specified in 2 CFR 200.329 is not required as the RPPR does not relate financial information to performance data. 1. Annual Project Reports Annual project reports should address progress in all activities of the project, including any activities intended to address the Broader Impacts criterion that are not intrinsic to the research. These reports are not cumulative and should be written specifically for the current budget period. Annual project reports must be submitted in Research.gov no later than 90 days prior to the end of the current budget period to provide sufficient time for review and approval by the cognizant NSF Program Officer. The report becomes overdue the day after the end of the current budget period if it has not been submitted by the PI and approved by the cognizant NSF Program Officer. The report becomes overdue the day after the 90 day period ends. Failure to submit timely reports will delay processing of additional funding and administrative actions, including, but not limited to, no cost extensions. In the case of continuing grants, failure to submit timely reports will delay processing of funding increments. See also Chapter VI.E.3. Annual project reports may not be required for fellowship awards. Specific reporting requirements for fellowships may be established in the applicable solicitation. For multi year standard grants, PIs are required to submit annual reports as outlined above. In the case of cooperative agreements, the annual project report is required before NSF approves any future funding increments. Continuing grants also are subject to the same policies regarding report submission as outlined above. For continuing grants that have a duration of 18 months or more per increment, two annual reports are required. A report must be submitted for the first 12 months of the project, and then another report for the remaining months of the increment. Continuing grants which include an increment of 24 months will require an annual report for each 12 month period. 2. Final Annual Project Report The final annual project report is the last annual report of the project and should be written specifically for the most recently completed budget period. It should address progress in all activities of the project in its final year, including any activities intended to address the Broader Impacts criterion that are not intrinsic to the research. This report is not cumulative. By submitting the final annual project report, the PI is signifying that the scope of work for the project has been completed and that the PI does not anticipate that any further research activities including a no cost extension, supplemental funding, or transfer of the award need to be completed on the project. Submission of the final annual project report, however, does not preclude the recipient from requesting any further payments for costs incurred during the period of performance.  Proposal Award Policies Procedures Guide VII 9 NSF 23 1 Unless otherwise specified in the award, the final annual project report must be submitted in Research.gov no later than 120 days following the end date of the award. As reflected in the Project Report System, the report is considered due during the 120 day period. If the report has not been submitted by the PI and approved by the cognizant NSF Program Officer within the 120 days period, the report becomes overdue. In addition, the recipient also shall provide to the cognizant NSF Program Officer, within 120 days following the end date of the award any unique reports or other end items specified in the award, including any reporting requirements set forth in any NSF brochure, guide, solicitation, etc., referenced in the award as being directly related to either the award or the administration of the award. a final cost share notification documented and certified by the AOR for awards where there is mandatory cost sharing established for the program. Final annual project reports may not be required for institutional graduate research fellowships. However, final reporting requirements for individual fellowships are established in the applicable program solicitation. 3. Project Outcomes Report for the General Public POR This report serves as a brief summary, prepared specifically for the public, of the nature and outcomes of the project. Section Contents a. Describe the project outcomes or findings that address the intellectual merit and broader impacts of the work as defined in the NSF merit review criteria. This description should be a brief generally, two to three paragraphs summary of the project s results that is written for the lay reader. PIs are strongly encouraged to avoid use of jargon, terms of art, or acronyms. b. NSF will automatically include all publications associated with the award that are reported in annual and final project reports. Other products that have resulted from the award may also be listed. Examples of other products include collections, data sets, software, as well as educational materials. c. Information regarding anticipated publication of project results, as well as any other information that would be of interest to the public also may be included in this section. Recipients are to ensure that the report does not contain any confidential, proprietary business information unpublished conclusions or data that might compromise the ability to publish results in the research literature or invention disclosures that might adversely affect the patent rights or those of the organization, in a subject invention under the award. PORs are not to contain any personally identifiable information such as home contact information, individual demographic data or individually identifiable information collected from human research participants. This report will be posted electronically by NSF exactly as it is submitted and will be accompanied by the following disclaimer This Project Outcomes Report for the General Public is displayed verbatim as submitted by the Principal Investigator PI for this award. Any opinions, findings, and conclusions or recommendations expressed in this Report are those of the PI and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Science Foundation NSF has not approved or endorsed its content. The POR must be submitted in Research.gov no later than 120 days following the end date of the award. The report becomes overdue the day after the 120 day period ends if it has not been submitted by the PI. By submitting the POR, the PI is signifying that the scope of work for the project has been completed and that the PI does not anticipate that any further research activities including a no cost extension, supplemental funding, or transfer of the award need to be completed on the project. Submission of the POR, however, does not preclude the recipient from requesting any further payments for costs incurred during the period of performance.  Proposal Award Policies Procedures Guide VII 10 NSF 23 1 4. Compliance with Technical Reporting Requirements PIs must submit final technical reports within the time period specified. Failure to provide these reports on a timely basis will delay NSF review and processing of pending proposals for all identified PIs and co PIs on a given award. 5. Award Closeout Award closeout is the process by which NSF determines that all applicable administrative actions and all required work of the award have been completed. See also Chapter VI.D.3.c for additional information on no cost extensions. The close out amount will be based on the costs recorded at that time. See also Chapter VIII.E.5 for additional information on post closeout adjustments and final disbursements. Awards are administratively closed after the award is financially closed. In most cases, awards are administratively closed automatically based solely on the financial closeout of the award. There are certain cases, such as if the award includes a cost sharing requirement or Federally owned equipment, where the administrative close is held until the award is reviewed by an NSF Official. The administrative closeout of the award is an NSF action. If additional documentation is required, NSF will contact the recipient. In addition to the financial and administrative closeout, all required project reports, including the Final Annual Project Report and Project Outcomes Report, must also be submitted to completely close the award, and after determination that any other administrative requirements in the award have been met. Awards will be financially closed out 120 days after their expiration date. In accordance with 2 CFR 200.344 i , if the recipient does not submit all required reports within one year of the period of performance end date, NSF must report the recipient s material failure to comply with the terms and conditions of the award with the OMB designated integrity and performance system currently FAPIIS . NSF may also pursue other enforcement actions per 2 CFR 200.339. In the event a final audit has not been performed prior to the closeout of the award, NSF reserves the right to recover funds after fully considering the recommendations on disallowed costs resulting from the final audit. E. Record Retention and Audit 1. Financial records, supporting documents, statistical records, and all other records pertinent to the NSF award must be retained by the recipient for a period of three years from award financial closeout described in Chapter VIII.E.3, except as noted in 2 CFR 200.334. 2. It is the responsibility of recipients that are States, local governments, or non profit organizations to arrange for the conduct of audits as required by 2 CFR 200, Subpart F. They shall provide copies of the reports of these audits to the Federal Audit Clearinghouse see 2 CFR 200.512 b . Any Federal audit deemed necessary by NSF shall build upon the results of such audit s . 3. All awards issued by NSF meet the definition of Research and Development R D at 2 CFR 200.1. As such, auditees should identify NSF awards as part of the R D cluster on the Schedule of Expenditures of Federal Awards SEFA . The auditor should test NSF awards for compliance as instructed in Part V, Clusters of Programs. NSF recognizes that some awards may have another classification for purposes of indirect costs F A . The auditor is not required to report the disconnect i.e., the award is classified as R D for audit purposes but non research for indirect cost rate F A purposes , unless the auditee is charging indirect costs at a rate other than the rate s specified in the award document s .  Proposal Award Policies Procedures Guide VIII 1 NSF 23 1 Chapter VIII Financial Requirements and Payments The acceptance of an award from NSF creates a legal obligation on the part of the recipient organization to use the funds or property made available in accordance with the terms and conditions of the award. Payments may be made in advance of work performed or as a reimbursement for work performed and or costs incurred by the recipient. Payments, however, may not be made prior to an award being signed by an NSF Grants and Agreements Officer. NSF has a reversionary interest in any a unused funds from advance payments b improperly applied funds whether or not received as an advance payment and c property acquired through the award, to which NSF specifically either retains title or reserves the right to require title transfer. The provisions of this chapter apply to all NSF awards. Graduate fellowship awards made to domestic institutions of higher education are included, but contracts are excluded. All categories of recipients are covered by this chapter. The procedures in this chapter apply primarily to the comptroller s office or business office. A. Standards for Financial Management NSF recipients must meet the financial management systems requirements of 2 CFR 200.302. B. Definitions The following definitions are either not included elsewhere in Part II of the PAPPG or are repeated in this Chapter because of their special applicability. 1. Advance Payment means a payment that NSF makes by any appropriate payment mechanism, including a predetermined payment schedule, before the recipient disburses the funds for program purposes. 2. Business Officer means the financial official of the recipient organization who has primary responsibility for the accountability for, and reporting on, NSF award funds. 3. Cash on Hand means a recipient organization s cash position relative to the funds received from NSF minus the costs incurred for the award. 4. Disbursements Outlays Expenditures means charges made by the recipient to a project or program for which an NSF award was received. 5. Financial Functions means the NSF systems and services used by recipients to transmit financial information to NSF. Recipients must access Financial Functions through Research.gov. The primary Financial Functions used by recipients are a Award Cash Management Service ACM means NSF s award payment process under which recipients provide award level detail at the time of the payment request. ACM replaced both the reporting of expenditures on the Federal Financial Report FFR and the Cash Request Function.  Proposal Award Policies Procedures Guide VIII 2 NSF 23 1 b Federal Financial Report History means the electronic version of the standard Federal Financial Report . This was used by recipients prior to ACM implementation to report the financial activity of NSF awards on a quarterly basis. 6. Recipient means an entity that receives an award directly from NSF. The term recipient does not include subrecipients or individuals that are beneficiaries of the award. NSF awards are normally made to organizations rather than to the PI and any co PIs identified on a proposal. Categories of eligible proposers may be found in Chapter I.E. 7. Recipient Obligations means orders placed for property and services, contracts and subawards made, and similar transactions during a given period that require payment by the recipient during the same or a future period. 8. Improper Payment means any payment that should not have been made or that was made in an incorrect amount under statutory, contractual, administrative, or other legally applicable requirements. 9. NSF Obligations means funds authorized by an NSF Grants and Agreements Officer for a specific NSF award creating a balance payable to a recipient. 10. Payments means the funds transferred from NSF to the recipient by electronic funds transfer Automated Clearing House ACH and on some rare occasions by check or by wire for same day electronic funds transfer or international payments. 11. Unexpended Balance means the sum of the awarded funds not yet obligated by the recipient and obligated balances not yet paid by the recipient. An unexpended balance is the result of awarded funds not being spent, or when the total expenditures for a project are less than the amount awarded. It can also be defined as the unspent portion of a budgeted amount, available for authorized future expenses during the award period. 12. Unliquidated Obligations a for recipients operating on a cash basis, means obligations incurred by the recipient that have not been paid liquidated . b for recipients operating on an accrual expenditure basis, means obligations incurred by the recipient for which an expenditure has not been recorded. 13. Unobligated Balance means the cumulative amount of budget authority that remains available for obligation under law in unexpired accounts. C. Payment Requirements 1. Requesting Payments NSF recipients, except for some Special Payment recipients see Chapter VIII.C.4 , and some foreign recipients, are required to request payments electronically through ACM . Under ACM , recipients must provide award level detail at the time of the payment request. Certain Special Payment recipients and foreign recipients without access to a U.S. bank are required to request funds by submitting a Request for Advance or Reimbursement Form , SF 270 , to NSF either through mail, email or by fax.  Proposal Award Policies Procedures Guide VIII 3 NSF 23 1 2. Payment Policies The purpose of this section is to prescribe the timing of advances and the procedures to be observed to ensure that cash payments occur only when essential to meet the needs of a recipient for its actual disbursements. a. Timing of Payments. Advance payments to recipients must be limited to the minimum amounts needed. The timing of advanced payments must be in accordance with the actual, immediate cash requirements of the recipient in carrying out the purpose of the approved program or project. The timing and amount of advance payments must be as close as is administratively practicable to the actual disbursements by the recipient for direct program or project costs and the proportionate share of any allowable indirect costs F A . b. Payments to Subrecipients and Contractors. Payments made by NSF recipients to subrecipients and contractors shall conform to the same standards of timing and amount as apply to payments by NSF to its recipients. c. Withholding Payments. NSF reserves the right, upon written notice, to withhold future payments after a specified date if the recipient either i fails to comply with the terms and conditions of an NSF award, including the reporting requirements or ii is indebted to the US Government. Payments will be released to the recipient upon subsequent compliance. d. Safeguarding Funds. In no case will NSF funds be commingled with the personal funds of, or be used for personal purposes by, any officer, employee, or agent of the recipient nor will any of these funds be deposited in personal bank accounts for disbursement by personal check. 3. Request for Payment a. Recipients may submit requests for payments as often as they like and may submit payment requests for reimbursement or in advance of costs incurred. The following conditions must exist for recipients submitting payment requests in advance of costs incurred i Funds for the project period have been obligated by a Grants and Agreements Officer in the form of an electronically signed grant ii The recipient has established written procedures that will minimize the time elapsing between the transfer of funds from the U.S. Treasury and their disbursement by the recipient and iii The recipient s financial management system meets the standards for fund control and accountability prescribed in 2 CFR 200.302. b. Recipients shall maintain advances of NSF funds in interest bearing accounts as specified in Chapter VIII.D.3. 4. Special Payment Recipients When recipients do not meet the conditions specified in Chapter VIII.C.3 above, or when otherwise considered appropriate, NSF may restrict their capability to request funds through ACM or they may be required to request funds by using a Request for Advance or Reimbursement SF 270 form. The cognizant  Proposal Award Policies Procedures Guide VIII 4 NSF 23 1 NSF Grants and Agreements Officer is responsible for establishing the documentation requirements for special payment recipients. Documentation may be submitted by email, by fax to 703 292 9142, or through the mail to National Science Foundation Division of Grants Agreements 2415 Eisenhower Avenue Alexandria, VA 22314 5. Working Capital Advance In those cases where the reimbursement method described in Chapter VIII.C.3 is not feasible, arrangements may be made whereby NSF projects are financed on a working capital advance basis. On this basis, funds may be advanced to the recipient to cover estimated disbursement needs for a given initial period. Thereafter, the recipient would be reimbursed for the amount of its actual cash disbursements. The amount of the initial advance shall be geared to the reimbursement cycle so that after the initial period, the advance approximately equals the average amount of the recipients unreimbursed program disbursements. 6. Recipient Banking Information for Payments The System for Award Management SAM is the NSF system of record for organizational financial information. Once a grant is awarded, failure to maintain current and complete financial information within SAM could prevent the recipient from receiving funds. D. Cash Refunds and Credits to NSF 1. Final Unexpended Balance NSF has a reversionary interest in the unexpended balance of an award upon the end date or completion of the award. Based on final payment amounts submitted through ACM , the final unexpended balance will be computed by NSF and de obligated from the award amount. 2. Erroneous Payments Advances or reimbursements made in error must be refunded to the National Science Foundation. Excess funds should be promptly refunded electronically or by check. Electronic remittances are preferred, where practical, and should be submitted through Pay.gov. When electronic remittances are not practical, checks shall be mailed to NSF, Attn. Cashier, 2415 Eisenhower Avenue, Alexandria, VA 22314. Contact the NSF Division of Financial Management at 703 292 8280 for additional information. The NSF Award ID s and the reason for the return e.g., excess cash, funds not spent, interest, part interest part other, etc. should be included in any remittance submitted to NSF. The only exception to the requirement for prompt refunding is when the funds involved will be disbursed immediately. This exception for prompt refunding should not be construed as approval by NSF for a recipient to maintain excessive funds on hand. 3. Interest Earned on Advance Payments The following provisions implement the applicable portions of 2 CFR 200.305 on interest income. Recipients shall maintain advances of NSF funds in interest bearing accounts, unless any of the following apply  Proposal Award Policies Procedures Guide VIII 5 NSF 23 1 a. The recipient receives less than 250,000 in Federal awards per year b. The best reasonably available interest bearing account would not be expected to earn interest in excess of 500 per year on Federal cash balances c. The depository would require an average or minimum balance so high that it would not be feasible within the expected Federal and non Federal cash resources or d. A foreign government or banking system prohibits or precludes interest bearing accounts. Recipients may retain interest earned amounts up to 500 per year for administrative expenses. Any additional interest earned on Federal advance payments deposited in interest bearing accounts must be remitted annually to the Department of Health and Human Services Payment Management System PMS through an electronic medium using either Automated Clearing House ACH network or a Fedwire Funds Service payment. Remittances must include an explanation stating that the refund is for interest, include NSF as the name of the awarding agency, and list the Federal award number s for which the interest was earned. The remittance must be submitted as follows i For ACH Returns Routing Number 051036706 Account number 303000 Bank Name and Location Credit Gateway ACH Receiver St. Paul, MN ii For Fedwire Returns Routing Number 021030004 Account Number 75010501 Bank Name and Location Federal Reserve Bank Treas NYC Funds Transfer Division New York, NY Please note organization initiating payment is likely to incur a charge from your Financial Institution for this type of payment iii For International ACH Returns Beneficiary Account Federal Reserve Bank of New York ITS FRBNY ITS Bank Citibank N.A. New York Swift Code CITIUS33 Account Number 36838868 Bank Address 388 Greenwich Street, New York, NY 10013 USA Payment Details Line 70 Agency Locator Code ALC 75010501 Name abbreviated when possible and ALC Agency POC Michelle Haney, 301 492 5065 iv For recipients that do not have electronic remittance capability, please make check payable to The Department of Health and Human Services. Mail Check to Treasury approved lockbox HHS Program Support Center, P.O. Box 530231, Atlanta, GA 30353 0231 Please allow 4 6 weeks for processing of a payment by check to be applied to the appropriate PMS account v Questions can be directed to PMS at 877 614 5533 or PMSSupport psc.hhs.gov.  Proposal Award Policies Procedures Guide VIII 6 NSF 23 1 4. Program Income a. Background The following provisions implement the applicable portions of 2 CFR 200.307 on program income. b. Definition Program income means gross income earned by the recipient that is directly generated by a supported activity or earned as a result of the grant during the period of performance. Program income includes, but is not limited to, income from fees for services performed, the use of rental or real or personal property acquired under the grant, the sale of commodities or items fabricated under the grant, license fees and royalties on patents and copyrights, and principal and interest on loans made with grant funds. Interest earned on advances of Federal funds is not program income. Except as otherwise provided in Federal statutes, regulations, or the terms and conditions of the award, program income does not include rebates, credits, discounts, and interest earned on any of them. See also 35 USC 200 212 Disposition of Rights in Educational Awards as it applies to inventions made under Federal awards. Note Registration fees collected under NSF supported conferences are considered program income. c. NSF Policy i Standard Treatment Unless otherwise specified in the grant, program income received or accruing to the recipient during the period of the grant is to be retained by the recipient, added to the funds committed to the project by NSF, and thus used to further project objectives. The recipient has no obligation to NSF with respect to program income received beyond the period of the grant. The recipient also shall have no obligation to NSF with respect to program income earned from license fees and royalties for copyrighted material, patents, patent applications, trademarks, and inventions produced under an award. However, Patent and Trademark Amendments 35 USC 18 shall apply to inventions made under an award. Efforts should be made to avoid having unexpended program income remaining at the end date of the grant. Program income earned during the project period should be expended prior to requesting reimbursement against the grant. In the event a recipient has unexpended program income remaining at the end of the grant, it must be remitted to NSF by crediting costs otherwise chargeable against the grant. If it is not possible to record the credit via ACM , the excess program income must be remitted to NSF electronically or by check payable to the National Science Foundation. See section D.2 above for further information. ii Special Treatment In exceptional circumstances, the NSF Grants and Agreements Officer, in collaboration with Program Officers and other appropriate NSF offices, may approve use of a special grant provision to restrict or eliminate a recipient s control of income earned through NSF supported activities if it determines that this would best serve the purposes of a particular program or grant. The special provisions may require treatment of the program income via use of the deductive method, the Federal share of program income be kept in a separate account or reported on and or remitted for such periods as may be reasonable under the circumstances. If, in accordance with the grant terms and conditions program income is designated for deductive treatment, it must be remitted to NSF by crediting costs otherwise chargeable against the grant. Program Income in excess of the award will be remitted to NSF electronically or by check payable to the National Science Foundation.  Proposal Award Policies Procedures Guide VIII 7 NSF 23 1 iii Program Income Reporting Requirements On an annual basis, recipients are required to submit a Program Income Reporting Worksheet to NSF in order to report program income earned and expended for any of their awards or to validate that they did not earn and expend program income for any of their grants during the applicable period. a The Program Income Reporting Worksheet utilizes the standard, OMB approved government wide data elements from the Program Income section of the Federal Financial Report SF 425 . b The Program Income Reporting Worksheet in Microsoft Excel is available to recipients through the Program Income page of Research.gov. Recipients are required to report the award number, amount of program income earned, amount of program income expended, and the amount of unexpended program income remaining as of the applicable period. Recipients that have no program income to report will be able to validate that status by an email response. The Program Income Reporting Worksheet is due 45 calendar days after the end of the Federal fiscal year. c Postdoctoral Research Fellowship awards made directly to individuals are exempt from this annual reporting requirement. Failure to report program income or to validate that no program income was earned expended could result in suspension of future grant payments. 5. Other Cost Credits Purchase discounts, rebates, allowances, credits resulting from overhead rate adjustments and other credits relating to any allowable cost received by or accruing to the recipient shall be credited against NSF award costs if the grant has not been financially closed out. See also Chapter X.A.2.c. E. Award Financial Reporting Requirements and Final Disbursements NSF does not require recipients to submit FFRs for each award for purposes of final award accountability. NSF procedures have been designed to extract the final financial data from the entries in ACM . This is accomplished as follows For any award listed on the ACM Payments screen, the recipient will enter the final payment amount in the Payment Amount Requested column to complete final financial reporting to NSF. Considerations for financial closeout are as follows 1. After closeout, if final disbursements change by 1.00 or more from the final award amount, then the recipient should submit an Adjustment to a Financially Closed Award through the ACM payment process. 2. Recipients must liquidate all obligations incurred under their awards not later than 120 calendar days after the award end date. 3. NSF will financially close awards calendar 120 days after the award end date64 and the award will be removed from the ACM payment screen for active awards. Any remaining funds that exceed the final payment amount will be deobligated from the award so the net award balance will equal total payments. 4. Recipients also have the option of using ACM to designate awards for financial closeout prior to NSF s regularly scheduled close out date. Recipients can complete that action by selecting the Final Flag 64 Awards that end on May 31 may be closed early, on or before the last day ACM is available for drawing down funds in September, to accommodate NSF s Federal fiscal year end closeout.  Proposal Award Policies Procedures Guide VIII 8 NSF 23 1 on the ACM payment screen. Note that the flag cannot be unchecked at a later date and should typically not be used for original awards that transferred to another awardee organization . Selecting the Final Flag will financially close the award upon posting of the ACM transaction to the NSF financial accounting system, typically overnight. 5. Recipients are authorized to make upward or downward adjustments to the Federal share of costs for a financially closed award within the following time limits Upward adjustments may be submitted through ACM for up to 14 months after the financial closeout date of the award or until the appropriated funds cancel65, whichever is earlier. Downward adjustments may be submitted through ACM until the appropriated funding for the award cancels. The time limitation for ACM downward adjustments has no effect on the requirement that the recipient return any funds due to NSF as a result of later refunds, corrections, or other transactions including final indirect cost rate adjustments. In cases where the award appropriation has been canceled, the recipient should return the funds associated with the downward adjustment in accordance with section D. Cash Refunds and Credits to NSF. 6. NSF will notify recipients of any canceling appropriations on open awards in order for recipients to properly expend and draw down funds before the end of the Federal fiscal year. Recipients must not interpret NSF s notification of canceling appropriations as direction to draw down NSF funds for which there is no associated expenditure need. Recipients are reminded that the timing and amount of advance payments must be as close and as administratively practicable to the actual disbursements in accordance with Chapter VIII.C.2, and that all excess funds drawn must be returned to NSF promptly. See section C. above for additional information on award payments. If only a portion of the awarded funds are canceling, then NSF will reduce the available balance of the award. If all funds under the award are canceling appropriations, then NSF must financially close the award no later than September 30th regardless of the award end date. No extensions, requests for payment, or upward adjustments will be allowed beyond the end of the Federal fiscal year in which the funds cancel. Although in this situation awards may be financially closed early, recipients will still have the full 120 day closeout period to submit final annual project reports in accordance with the award terms and conditions. 65 In accordance with 31 USC 1552 a , funds will no longer be available for expenditure for any purpose beyond September 30th of the fifth fiscal year after the expiration of a fixed appropriation s period of availability for incurring new obligations.  Proposal Award Policies Procedures Guide IX 1 NSF 23 1 Chapter IX Recipient Standards NSF encourages the increased involvement of academic researchers and educators with industry and private entrepreneurial ventures but recognizes that such interactions carry with them an increased risk of conflicts of interest. Chapter IX.A contains NSF s policy on conflicts of interest. 2 CFR 200 prescribes three separate sets of standards related to the financial and program management of Federal awards, each governing a different area financial management, property management, and procurement management. Chapter IX.D, IX.E and IX.F implement these standards and extend their applicability to all types of recipients of NSF awards, including for profit organizations. A. Conflict of Interest Policies 1. NSF requires each recipient organization employing more than fifty persons to maintain an appropriate written and enforced policy on conflict of interest and that all conflicts of interest for each award be managed, reduced, or eliminated prior to the expenditure of the award funds. If the organization carries out agency funded research through subrecipients or collaborators, the organization must take reasonable steps to ensure that a. the entity has its own policies in place that meet the requirements of this policy or b. investigators working for such entities follow the policies of the primary organization. Guidance for development of such policies has been issued by university associations and scientific societies. 2. An organizational conflict of interest policy should require that each investigator disclose to a responsible representative of the organization all significant financial interests of the investigator including those of the investigator s spouse and dependent children i that would reasonably appear to be affected by the research or educational activities funded or proposed for funding by NSF or ii in entities whose financial interests would reasonably appear to be affected by such activities. The term investigator means the PI, co PIs, and any other person identified on the proposed project who is responsible for the design, conduct, or reporting of research or educational activities funded or proposed for funding by NSF. The term significant financial interest means anything of monetary value, including, but not limited to, salary or other payments for services e.g., consulting fees or honoraria equity interest e.g., stocks, stock options, private equity, or other ownership interests venture or other capital financing, and intellectual property rights e.g., patents, copyrights, and royalties from such rights . The term does not include a. salary, royalties or other remuneration from the proposing organization b. any ownership interests in the organization, if the organization is an applicant under the Small Business Innovation Research Program SBIR or Small Business Technology Transfer Program STTR c. income from seminars, lectures, or teaching engagements sponsored by public or non profit entities d. income from service on advisory committees or review panels for public or nonprofit entities  Proposal Award Policies Procedures Guide IX 2 NSF 23 1 e. an equity interest that, when aggregated for the investigator and the investigator s spouse and dependent children, meets both of the following tests i does not exceed 10,000 in value as determined through reference to public prices or other reasonable measures of fair market value and ii does not represent more than a 5 ownership interest in any single entity or f. salary, royalties, or other payments that, when aggregated for the investigator and the investigator s spouse and dependent children, are not expected to exceed 10,000 during the prior twelve month period. 3. An organizational policy must ensure that investigators have provided all required financial disclosures at the time the proposal is submitted to NSF. It must also require that those financial disclosures are updated during the period of the award, either on an annual basis, or as new reportable significant financial interests are obtained. 4. An organizational policy must designate one or more persons to review financial disclosures, determine whether a conflict of interest exists, and determine what conditions or restrictions, if any, should be imposed by the organization to manage, reduce or eliminate such conflict of interest. A conflict of interest exists when the reviewer s reasonably determines that a significant financial interest could directly and significantly affect the design, conduct, or reporting of NSF funded research or educational activities. Examples of conditions or restrictions that might be imposed to manage, reduce, or eliminate conflicts of interest include, but are not limited to a. public disclosure of significant financial interests b. monitoring of research by independent reviewers c. modification of the research plan d. disqualification from participation in the portion of the NSF funded research that would be affected by significant financial interests e. divestiture of significant financial interests or f. severance of relationships that create conflicts. If the reviewer s determines that imposing conditions or restrictions would be either ineffective or inequitable, and that the potential negative impacts that may arise from a significant financial interest are outweighed by interests of scientific progress, technology transfer, or the public health and welfare, then the reviewer s may allow the research to go forward without imposing such conditions or restrictions. 5. The organizational policy must include adequate enforcement mechanisms and provide for sanctions where appropriate. 6. The organizational policy must include arrangements for keeping NSF s Office of the General Counsel OGC appropriately informed if the organization finds that it is unable to satisfactorily manage a conflict of interest and if the organization finds that research will proceed without the imposition of conditions or restrictions when a conflict of interest exists.68 When OGC is notified of an unmanageable conflict of interest by a recipient, OGC will conduct the following review 68 Recipient notifications of conflict of interest that cannot be managed, reduced, or eliminated and recipient notifications of situations where research will proceed without the imposition of conditions or restrictions when a conflict of interest exists, must be signed and submitted by the AOR via use of NSF s electronic systems.  Proposal Award Policies Procedures Guide IX 3 NSF 23 1 a. Examine a copy of the organization s conflict of interest policy to ascertain if the policy includes procedures for addressing unmanageable conflicts. b. Contact the recipient organization s representative to determine what actions the organization plans has taken with respect to the reported unmanageable conflict of interest, ensuring consistency with their conflict of interest policy. c. Request confirmation from the recipient when proposed actions have been accomplished. 7. Organizations must maintain records of all financial disclosures and of all actions taken to resolve conflicts of interest for at least three years beyond the termination or completion of the award to which they relate, or until the resolution of any NSF action involving those records, whichever is longer. B. Responsible and Ethical Conduct of Research RECR Note The requirement specified in Section 7009 of the America Creating Opportunities to Meaningfully Promote Excellence in Technology, Education, and Science COMPETES Act 42 USC 1862o 1 , as amended, to have a plan to provide appropriate training and oversight in the responsible and ethical conduct of research to faculty and other senior personnel who will be supported by NSF to conduct research will go into effect for new proposals submitted or due on or after July 31, 2023. NSF, however, encourages the community to establish such training and oversight for faculty and other senior personnel prior to the July 31,2023 implementation. In the interim, proposers must continue to meet the guidance specified in PAPPG Chapter IX.B. 1. Background The responsible and ethical conduct of research RECR is critical for excellence, as well as public trust, in science and engineering. RECR involves not only a responsibility to generate and disseminate knowledge with rigor and integrity, but also a responsibility to a. conduct peer review with the highest ethical standards b. diligently protect proprietary information and intellectual property from inappropriate disclosure and c. treat students and colleagues fairly and with respect. Consequently, education in RECR is considered essential in the preparation of future scientists and engineers. Section 7009 of the America Creating Opportunities to Meaningfully Promote Excellence in Technology, Education, and Science COMPETES Act 42 USC 1862o 1 , as amended, requires that each institution that applies for financial assistance from the Foundation for science and engineering research or education describe in its grant proposal a plan to provide appropriate training and oversight in the responsible and ethical conduct of research to undergraduate students, graduate students, postdoctoral researchers, faculty, and other senior personnel supported by the proposed research project. Such training must include mentor training and mentorship. NSF encourages consideration of the following reports by the National Academies of Sciences, Engineering, and Medicine in meeting RECR requirements Fostering Integrity in Research Sexual Harassment of Women Climate, Culture, and Consequences in Academic Sciences, Engineering, and Medicine and Reproducibility and Replicability in Science. The language specified below provides NSF s implementation of Section 7009, as amended.  Proposal Award Policies Procedures Guide IX 4 NSF 23 1 2. Institutional Responsibilities a. An institution must have a plan in place to provide appropriate training and oversight in the responsible and ethical conduct of research to undergraduate students, graduate students, postdoctoral researchers, faculty, and other senior personnel who will be supported by NSF to conduct research. As noted in Chapter II.D.1.d iv , an institutional certification to this effect is required for each proposal. b. NSF s RECR requirement applies to the breadth of research disciplines that the Foundation funds. The training provided should be effective and must be appropriately tailored to the specific needs and circumstances at each institution. Accordingly, it is the responsibility of each institution to determine the content, focus and the delivery method for the RECR training.69 Such content, however, must include mentor training and mentorship as noted in Section B.1 above. While training plans are not required to be included in proposals submitted to NSF, institutions are advised that they are subject to review, upon request. c. An institution must designate one or more persons to oversee compliance with the RECR training requirement. d. Institutions are responsible for verifying that undergraduate students, graduate students, postdoctoral researchers, faculty, and other senior personnel supported by NSF to conduct research have received training in the responsible and ethical conduct of research. 3. NSF s Responsibilities NSF will not tolerate research misconduct in proposing or performing research funded by NSF, in reviewing research proposals submitted to NSF, or in reporting research results funded by NSF. Allegations of research misconduct are taken seriously and are investigated by NSF s Office of Inspector General OIG . OIG refers completed investigations of research misconduct to NSF for action. Upon findings of research misconduct, NSF will take appropriate action against individuals or organizations. C. Research Security NSF is committed to safeguarding the integrity and security of science while also keeping fundamental research open and collaborative. NSF seeks to address an age of new threats and challenges through close work with our partners in academia, law enforcement, intelligence, and other federal agencies. By fostering transparency, disclosure and other practices that reflect the values of research integrity, NSF is helping to lead the way in ensuring taxpayer funded research remains secure. NSF s research security initiatives seek to continue to increase the clarity and comprehensiveness of the Foundation s disclosure requirements coordinate with U.S. government interagency partners to harmonize disclosure information to the extent practicable communicate and build awareness with the scientific community share knowledge and best practices improve transparency and clarification for disclosure and mitigate risk through assessment and analysis to better understand the scale and scope. 69NSF has provided funding to the Online Ethics Center for S E, an online collaborative resource environment that provides resources that may be used by the institution in developing their training plan. This site contains RECR resources by discipline, provides links to published codes of ethics, as well as includes pages dedicated to resources produced or used by specific professional groups.  Proposal Award Policies Procedures Guide IX 5 NSF 23 1 In accordance with the Guidance for Implementation of National Security Presidential Memorandum 33 NSPM 33 on National Security Strategy for United States Government Supported Research and Development, the Foundation requires the following post award updates to current and pending support information after issuance of an NSF award 1. Post award Disclosure of Current Support and In Kind Contribution Information If an organization discovers that a PI or co PI on an active NSF award failed to disclose current support or in kind contribution information70 as part of the proposal submission process see PAPPG Chapter II.D.2.h ii , the AOR must submit the information specified in the applicable general term and condition article entitled, Post award Disclosure of Current Support and In kind Contribution Information within 30 calendar days of the identification of the undisclosed current support or in kind contribution through use of the Notification and Request Module in Research.gov. NSF may consult with the AOR, or designee, if necessary, and determine the impact of the new information on the NSF funded award, and, where necessary, take appropriate action. 2. Update of Current Support in Annual and Final Project Reports PIs and co PIs on active NSF awards must indicate if there has been a change in active other support since submission of the proposal, or the last reporting period in their annual and final project report. If there has been a change, the individual must submit a revised current and pending support document prepared in SciENcv as part of their project report. NSF may consult with the PI or co PI and the AOR, if necessary, and determine the impact of the new information on the NSF funded award, and, where necessary, take appropriate action. D. Financial Management Systems Standards NSF recipients are required to have financial management systems which meet the requirements of 2 CFR 200.302. E. Property Management Standards 2 CFR 200.310 316 prescribe standards for managing and disposing of property furnished by the Federal government or whose cost was charged to a project supported by a Federal award. In the rare instances where NSF awards involve the acquisition of real property, the real property standards of 2 CFR 200.311 are applicable to such NSF awards. NSF implementation of the OMB standards on intangible property is contained in Chapter XI.D. Title to materials developed and supplies purchased under an NSF award will vest in the recipient, subject to the conditions identified the applicable award terms and conditions, and in Chapter IX.E.2.a. below. 1. Title to Equipment Title to equipment purchased or fabricated with NSF funds will normally vest in the recipient organization upon acquisition. This includes IHEs or other non profit organizations, small businesses, or other for profit organizations, foreign public entities or foreign organizations, and State, local or tribal governments. Only if specified in the award will title pass directly to the government upon acquisition and is then designated as Federally owned property. For equipment use and disposition, the following applies 70 The post award disclosure requirement applies to current support including in kind contributions that was active as of the date the proposal was submitted to NSF. See NSF Pre award and Post award Disclosures Relating to the Biographical Sketch and Current and Pending Support which has been developed to assist users in determining the types of activities that must be disclosed.  Proposal Award Policies Procedures Guide IX 6 NSF 23 1 a. For major facility awards, including associated upgrades, equipment is subject to the provisions of 2 CFR 200.313. b. For all other awards, such equipment is considered exempt property as outlined below and in accordance with the applicable award terms and conditions. 2. Conditions for Acquisition, Use, and Disposition of Equipment a. Recipient Assurance. The recipient will assure each purchase of equipment is i necessary for the research or activity supported by the award ii not otherwise reasonably available and accessible iii of the type normally charged as a direct cost to sponsored agreements and iv acquired in accordance with organizational practice. b. General Purpose Equipment. Expenditures for general purpose equipment are typically not available for support. General Purpose Equipment is defined in 2 CFR 200.1. c. Equipment Usage. The equipment must remain in use for the specific project for which it was obtained in accordance with 2 CFR 200.313 c 1 unless the provision in 2 CFR 200.313 c 4 applies. d. Equipment Sharing. The equipment must be shared on other projects or programs in accordance with 2 CFR 200.313 c 1 . e. Property Management Requirements. The recipient shall maintain a property management system which, at a minimum, meets the requirements of 2 CFR 200.313 d . f. Competition. In accordance with 2 CFR 200.313 c 3 , recipients shall not use equipment acquired with Federal funds to provide services for a fee that is less than private companies charge for equivalent services, unless specifically authorized by statute, for as long as the Federal government retains an interest in the equipment. See section E.4 below, Principles Relating to the Use of NSF Supported Research Instrumentation and Facilities. g. Right to Transfer Title. i In accordance with 2 CFR 200.313 e , NSF may identify items of equipment having a unit acquisition cost of 5,000 or more where NSF reserves the right to transfer the title to the Federal government or to a third party named by the Federal government at any time during the award period. ii In such cases where NSF elects to transfer the title, disposition instructions will be issued no later than 120 days after the end date of the NSF supported project for which it was acquired. 3. Property Management Requirements for Federally owned Property In the event that title to equipment or real property is vested in the Federal government, such Federally owned property FOP must be identified, tagged or segregated in such a manner as to indicate clearly its ownership by the government. Unless otherwise provided in the award, such FOP must be used only for the performance of the project. The recipient must submit an annual inventory report and final inventory report for all FOP by NSF award number to NSF using the NSF s Central Property Inventory Repository CPIR . The annual report must be received in the CPIR system no later than October 15 each year. Additionally, the final inventory report for all FOP is due upon the end date of the award for further agency guidance on utilization and disposition. See Chapter IX.E.5 . Contact the NSF Property Administrator at nsfproperty nsf.gov for access to the CPIR system or for any property related questions.  Proposal Award Policies Procedures Guide IX 7 NSF 23 1 4. Principles Relating to the Use of NSF Supported Research Instrumentation and Facilities The following principles on use of NSF supported instrumentation and facilities were adopted by the NSB The National Science Foundation seeks the maximum productive use of the Nation s scientific instrumentation and research expertise. Ensuring that the highest quality instrumentation, facilities, and services are available to scientific users, both academic and industrial, is a key requirement, as are harmonious relations and cooperation between industry and universities. Private research and testing laboratories, as well as university, government, and industrial laboratories, have a contribution to make. The National Science Board recognizes that there may be circumstances where NSF recipients use NSF supported research instrumentation to provide services in commerce for a fee, to an extent that such practice, 1 detracts from the performance of their obligation under the award, and or 2 may have a material and deleterious effect on the success of private companies engaged in the provision of equivalent services. It is contrary to the NSF s intent for recipients to use NSF supported research instrumentation or facilities to provide services for a fee in competition with private companies in a manner that is prohibited by 2 CFR 200.313 c 3 . Recipients should implement the above principles and related award conditions in a reasonable manner. Recipients are expected to provide fair and adequate consideration of any complaints about use of instrumentation and facilities. 5. Excess Government Personal Property a. Policy i As a means of expanding the ability of recipients to accomplish NSF objectives while conserving supply and equipment funds, NSF will continue to sponsor the transfer of excess government personal property to NSF recipients. ii Excess government personal property includes all types of personal equipment and materials except consumable items such as drugs, paint, etc. , new or used, owned by the Federal government and no longer needed by the holding agency, but having additional useful life. Under regulations established by the General Services Administration GSA , the agency charged with operating this program, excess government personal property may be reported to, or requested from, GSA by other Federal agencies, including NSF. iii NSF will sponsor the transfer of excess government personal property to eligible organizations under one of the following conditions a the use of the property significantly furthers an NSF award supported activity b the property is such that it would have been procured under the award for which property is being requested if additional award funds had been available c the property is used as part of the award activity and subsequently for research or science education purposes or d the property is classified by GSA as scientific or engineering research equipment and has a unit acquisition cost of 1,000 or more. See Chapter IX.E.5.f.  Proposal Award Policies Procedures Guide IX 8 NSF 23 1 b. Eligibility Eligible organizations are NSF recipients that are public or private colleges or universities or non profit organizations whose primary purpose is the conduct of research or science education activities. State and municipal governments, public health units, hospitals, for profit firms, and individual PIs are not eligible for excess government personal property under NSF sponsorship. c. Procedures i To access a worldwide inventory of available excess personal property, an eligible recipient should contact the Property Administrator nsfproperty nsf.gov , to become a registered user of GSAXcess , GSA s online personal property system. ii Recipients can visit GSAXcess to screen for items that are necessary to accomplish the NSF supported project by searching GSA s inventory and adding items to the Selection Cart. Excess personal property is reported by Category Federal Supply Classification FSC and includes the item control number, name, location, quantity available, and unit of issue, original acquisition cost, surplus release date and condition of items posted. In some instances a photograph of the property item is available. iii Materials and equipment so selected should be inspected whenever possible see Chapter IX.E.5.d , or the holding Federal agency should be contacted by the recipient to verify the condition of the items, because interpretation of condition codes can vary among agencies. iv If the condition of the item is acceptable, the recipient should freeze items by Checkout of the Selection Cart to generate a Transfer Control Number SF 122, Transfer Order Excess Personal Property. v The recipient should next submit the SF 122, Transfer Order Excess Personal Property and a separate written justification statement, if necessary, to the Property Administrator, DAS. The justification will explain why the property is needed to reduce the cost or enhance the performance under the specific grant for which the property is requested. vi The SF 122 should be signed by the AOR. The following information should also be provided on each SF 122 a name of recipient b award number c award end date d the statement The above equipment is requested for use by the recipient in support of research or education as outlined in the award and e the statement Transfer is in accordance with the provisions of 41 CFR 101.43. The recipient should also verify the automatic release date with GSA to preclude loss of property before the transaction is processed. vii The written justification should detail the scientific need for the equipment as it relates to the particular award under which the equipment is to be used, and should cite the conditions of this section as being binding upon the recipient, should the property be acquired. viii Upon receipt by NSF, the SF 122 will be reviewed and forwarded to the appropriate GSA Office. Items are usually allocated on a first come, first served basis. Since GSA may have several freezes on a piece of equipment, first come, first served is interpreted as the first approved SF 122 received by the GSA office and designated Area Property Officer APO . However, preference will be given by GSA to agencies which do not award title to equipment. As confirmation of approval, the recipient will receive copies of the  Proposal Award Policies Procedures Guide IX 9 NSF 23 1 SF 122 from the GSA APO. If the request is disapproved, it will be returned to the recipient with an appropriate explanation. ix Upon receipt of the requested property, the recipient should immediately return a copy of the SF 122 to NSF as evidence of delivery. Cancelations by GSA, or nonreceipt within a reasonable period of time should also be reported to NSF after follow up inquiries have been made to GSA. d. Visiting Holding Agency Facilities i Under current GSA regulations all non Federal recipient representatives wishing to visit holding agency facilities to screen or freeze government excess personal property must receive prior certification from GSA. Because of current security protocols, the holding agency may require written authorization for access. ii The number of screeners on an award should be limited to no more than two persons. The primary screener should be the PI. However, if the PI finds it impossible to screen, the PI may designate, in writing, a substitute. iii Normally, certification will be on a regional basis however, NSF will, under certain circumstances, sponsor recipient representatives who need to make interregional visits in order to secure equipment not readily available within their region. e. Dollar Limitation To ensure equitable distribution of excess government personal property, recipients may be authorized to acquire property under each NSF award up to a total acquisition cost equal to the dollar value of that particular award. Any request for excess property which causes the total to exceed the value of the award will require additional justification beyond that requested in Chapter IX.E.5.c. A higher percentage of excess property requested under a particular award by a recipient must be approved by an administrative level in NSF which is higher than the cognizant Program Officer. NSF will give full consideration to all factors in determining whether to approve transfers of excess property above the dollar value of a given award. Recipients are therefore urged to be selective in their requests for excess government personal property to limit quantities of each item where possible and to avoid stockpiling items for future use. f. Restrictions i NSF will sponsor the transfer of excess government personal equipment to eligible organizations only under project awards. As defined in the GSA regulations, project awards refers to awards made for specific purposes with established termination dates, e.g., awards made to specific organizations to perform specific tasks within set time frames and costs. No excess property may be acquired on behalf of conference, publication support awards, or travel awards. In addition, on summer type training awards, no property may be acquired after the training period has terminated. Further, recipients should exercise careful judgment on the appropriateness of requesting excess personal property when only a short period of time exists between the date of the property request and the completion or successful accomplishment of the NSF supported activity. GSA will consider items of personal property as research equipment for transfer without reimbursement to NSF for use by a recipient when the property requested has a unit acquisition cost of 1,000 or more and is within Federal Supply Classification Groups a 12 Fire Control Equipment b 14 Guided Missiles c 43 Pumps and Compressors d 48 Valves  Proposal Award Policies Procedures Guide IX 10 NSF 23 1 e 58 Communication, Detection and Coherent Radiation Equipment f 59 Electrical and Electronic Equipment Components g 65 Medical, Dental and Veterinary Equipment and Supplies h 66 Instruments and Laboratory Equipment i 67 Photographic Equipment j 68 Chemical and Chemical Products or k 70 General Purpose Automatic Data Processing Equipment, Software, Supplies and Support Equipment. Automatic data processing equipment must be acquired under the provisions in 41 CFR 201.23. ii GSA will give consideration to the transfer without reimbursement of items of excess property in other Federal supply classification groups and items with a unit acquisition cost of less than 1,000, when NSF certifies that the item requested is a component part of or related to a piece of research equipment or is an otherwise difficult to acquire item needed for scientific or engineering research. Items of property determined by GSA to be common use or general purpose property, regardless of classification or unit acquisition cost, shall not be transferred to a recipient for the purpose of cannibalization, unless the granting agency sends with the transfer request a supporting statement which clearly indicates that disassembly of the requested item for secondary use of its component parts, or for repair and maintenance of a similar item, has greater potential benefit than utilization of the item in its existing form and that a clear cost savings to the government will result, subject to final determination by GSA. g. Costs Excess government personal property is usually secured without cost. However, the recipient should specify the method of shipment and must pay all costs of packing, transportation and subsequent installation, rehabilitation and maintenance if required. Award funds may be used to pay such costs. h. Title Title to excess government personal property obtained by colleges, universities, and other non profit recipients through NSF sponsorship remains with the government until the property is delivered to the recipient organization. Upon delivery, the recipient should forward to NSF a receipted SF 122 which clearly lists the items of property actually obtained by the recipient. Unless NSF informs the recipient to the contrary, when this SF 122 is received at NSF, title to all property acquired will automatically pass to and be vested in the recipient organization, subject to the understanding that the property will be used for research or for science education purposes as long as it has a useful life. At such time as the property is no longer useful for such purposes, it may be disposed of in accordance with organizational practices, but any proceeds therefrom shall be used by the recipient solely for research or science education purposes. Under certain conditions, such as when highly specialized equipment is involved, NSF may retain title to excess property. When such a condition exists, NSF will inform the recipient. Excess government personal property may not be transferred to a foreign country without the express written approval of the Grants and Agreements Officer. i. Accountability and Recordkeeping i While no particular type of classification of accounts or inventory system is required, NSF expects that the responsible officials of the recipient organization will exercise careful stewardship of excess government personal property acquired in support of projects undertaken with NSF s financial assistance. In accordance with Chapter IX.E.5.e, relating to the dollar limitation on the amount of excess government personal property provided by NSF, recipients should maintain appropriate inventory procedures that will  Proposal Award Policies Procedures Guide IX 11 NSF 23 1 enable them to identify those requests which require more extensive administrative and scientific justification. In those cases where title to excess government personal property remains with the government, the recipient must maintain suitable records to identify its location, description, utilization, and value. The use of excess government personal property under an NSF award is subject to inspection and audit by representatives of NSF at all reasonable times during the life of the award under which the property was acquired. ii Further details may be obtained from the Property Administrator, Division of Administrative Services, National Science Foundation, 2415 Eisenhower Avenue, Alexandria, VA 22314, or via email nsfproperty nsf.gov . F. Procurement Standards NSF recipients shall adhere to the requirements of 2 CFR 200.317 327 which prescribes standards for use by recipients in establishing procedures for the procurement of supplies and other expendable property, equipment, real property, and other services with Federal funds.  Proposal Award Policies Procedures Guide X 1 NSF 23 1 Chapter X Allowability of Costs A. Basic Considerations Expenditures under NSF cost reimbursement awards are governed by the Federal cost principles and must conform with NSF policies where articulated in the applicable award general terms and conditions, award special provisions and recipient internal policies. While recipients are encouraged to seek advice regarding the treatment of costs from the NSF Grants and Agreements Officer identified in the award notice, it is the recipient that is ultimately responsible for ensuring that all costs charged to NSF awards meet the requirements of the cost principles contained in 2 CFR 200, Subpart E.71, award terms and conditions, and any other specific requirements of both the award notice and the applicable program solicitation. In addition, recipients should ensure that their own internal policies and procedures and other requirements are met for all charges to NSF awards. Otherwise, such costs may be disallowed during audit resolution or by specific determination of an NSF Grants and Agreements Officer. In the event a recipient anticipates charging an item of direct cost that might subsequently be disputed, an authorized official of the recipient organization should discuss the matter with the cognizant NSF Grants and Agreements Officer and document the conditions or factors surrounding the item in order to avoid possible subsequent disallowance. If the NSF Grants and Agreements Officer determines that such costs are appropriate considering the special requirements of a particular NSF sponsored activity, this should be documented through an advance agreement or understanding. Advance agreements regarding the treatment of such costs may be incorporated by specific language in the award notice, or by other written correspondence. 1. Conflicting Guidelines It is NSF s intent that the following guidance on cost allowability be consistent with the Federal cost principles. However, in the event of any discrepancy between the summary information contained in this Chapter and any specific provision of the cost principles contained in 2 CFR 200, Subpart E, the cost principles in effect as of the start date of the NSF award will govern. In the case of a discrepancy between the special provisions of an NSF award and the standards of the cost principles, the special provisions of the award will govern. 2. Other Considerations a. Maximum Obligation The maximum obligation of NSF for support of the project will not exceed the amount specified in the award, as amended. NSF does not amend awards to provide additional funds for such purposes as reimbursement for unrecovered indirect costs resulting from the establishment of final negotiated rates, or for increases in salaries, fringe benefits and other costs. b. Pre Award Costs 1 Recipients may incur allowable pre award costs within the 90 day period immediately preceding the start date of the award providing a the approval of pre award spending is made and documented in accordance with the recipient s policies and procedures and 71 Applicable cost principles for for profit organizations are contained in Federal Acquisition Regulation Part 31.  Proposal Award Policies Procedures Guide X 2 NSF 23 1 b the advanced funding is necessary for the effective and economical conduct of the project.72 2 Pre award expenditures are made at the recipient s risk. Recipient authority to approve pre award costs does not impose an obligation on NSF a in the absence of appropriations b if an award is not subsequently made or c if an award is made for a lesser amount than the recipient anticipated. 3 Requests for pre award costs for periods exceeding 90 days must be submitted to NSF via use of NSF s electronic systems. Pre award expenditures prior to funding of an increment within a continuing grant are not subject to this limitation or approval requirement but are subject to paragraph 2 above. 4 Pre award costs charged to NSF awards generally must be charged to the initial budget period of the award, unless otherwise determined by NSF or the prime recipient. See 2 CFR 200.458 . Additional information on pre award costs is available at 2 CFR 200.308 e 1 e 4 . c. Post End Date Costs NSF funds may not be expended subsequent to the end date of the award, except to liquidate valid commitments that were made on or before the end date, e.g., commitment of project funds for subrecipient or contractor for services rendered during that award period but not billed to the recipient until after the award ended. See Chapter VIII.E.2. Generally, the costs of equipment or materials and supplies ordered after the end date may not be charged to the project. In addition, the recipient typically should not purchase items of equipment, computing devices, or restocking of materials and supplies see 2 CFR 200.453 to expend remaining funds in anticipation of the end date of the award where there is little, or no time left for such items to be utilized in the actual conduct of the funded project. However, in accordance with 2 CFR 200.461, recipients may charge the NSF award before closeout, for the costs of publication or sharing of research results, if the costs are not incurred during the period of performance of the award. Publication costs such as this should be charged in the final budget period of the award, unless otherwise specified by NSF. 3. Prior Written Approvals The funding of items identified in the approved NSF budget constitutes NSF s authorization for the recipient to incur these costs, provided there is not a specific limitation in the award language and the costs are otherwise allowable, allocable, and reasonable in accordance with the cost principles contained in 2 CFR 200, Subpart E. If required in furtherance of the project, the recipient is authorized to transfer funds from one budget category to another for allowable expenditures. Recipients should refer to the applicable award general terms and conditions referenced in the award. The Research Terms and Conditions RTC , Appendix A, NSF column and the NSF Prior Approval Matrix for State Local Governments and For Profit Organizations, as applicable, provide a consolidated listing of prior approvals that are required to be obtained from the Foundation for NSF awards. Unless otherwise specified in the award notice or the applicable award general terms and conditions, no additional prior approvals beyond those specified in RTC Appendix A are required. Chapter VII.A.2 also provides a listing of required notifications to NSF. 72 In the case of a renewal award, recipients are reminded that costs incurred under the old grant cannot be transferred to the new award.  Proposal Award Policies Procedures Guide X 3 NSF 23 1 When a change requires NSF approval as specified in RTC Appendix A, the request must be submitted via the Notification and Request Module in Research.gov. If no specific option is available for the request, the Other Request option must be used. The request should clearly state which budget items, if any, are to be changed and by what amounts, and should justify the reasons for any changes. B. Direct Costs 1. Compensation Personal Services a. Salaries and Wages Compensation paid or accrued by the organization for employees working on the NSF supported project during the award period is allowable, in accordance with 2 CFR 200.430. b. Fringe Benefits If the proposer s usual accounting practices provide that its contributions to employee benefits leave, employee insurance, social security, retirement, other payroll related taxes, etc. be treated as direct costs, NSF award funds may be requested to fund fringe benefits as a direct cost. These are typically determined by application of a calculated fringe benefit rate for a particular class of employee full time or part time applied to the salaries and wages requested. They also may be paid based on actual costs for individual employees, if that institutional policy has been approved by the cognizant Federal agency for Indirect Costs. Fringe benefits that are not accrued but are charged as direct costs and incurred under pay as you go plans may be subject to reasonableness determination where the benefits are earned under other work and charged to the last activity on which the employee was working. This is of particular concern for large lump sum payments for leave, disability, pregnancy, or other employee fringe benefits. See 2 CFR 200.431 for the definition and allowability of fringe benefits. 2. Intra University IHE Consulting Since intra university consulting is assumed to be undertaken as a university obligation requiring no compensation in addition to full time salary, the principles summarized in Chapter X.B.1, also apply to those who function as consultants or otherwise contribute to a project conducted by another faculty member of the same institution. However, in unusual cases where consultation is across departmental lines or involves a separate or remote operation, and the work performed by the consultant is in addition to the consultant s regular appointment, any charges for such work representing extra compensation above the institutional base salary are allowable if consistent with established university policy and the applicable cost principles. 3. Federal Employees Employees of the Federal government other than NSF may be utilized as lecturers or staff members on a project and may receive compensation and or expenses if they obtain prior approval from their agencies to participate, and if services to the project are performed outside their regular working hours or while they are on leave status from official duties. Under no circumstances may NSF employees receive compensation from an NSF supported project.  Proposal Award Policies Procedures Guide X 4 NSF 23 1 C. Other Direct Costs 1. Build America, Buy America, and Made in America Statutes Except under certain programs, NSF does not normally make awards for construction or facility improvements. However, any form of construction, alteration, maintenance, or repair of infrastructure in the U.S. using Federal funds must follow the requirements specified in the Build America, Buy America provisions of the Infrastructure Investment and Jobs Act IIJA P.L. 117 58, Sections 70911 70917 as follows i when using federal funds for the purchase of goods, products, and materials produced in the United States ii all iron, steel, manufactured products, and construction materials used in Federally funded projects must be produced in the U.S iii the awardee must implement these requirements in its procurements and the article must flow down to all subawards and contracts at any tier and iv when supported by rationale, the awardee must submit a waiver request to the cognizant NSF Program Officer and Grants and Agreements Officer if these requirements cannot be met. 2 News Release Costs Costs of communicating with the public and press to announce the results and accomplishments of an NSF supported project are allowable. Recipients should be aware of the restrictions on advertising, organizational promotion, and lobbying costs as outlined in the applicable cost principles. See 2 CFR 200.421 for additional information on advertising and public relations. In the event the performing organization wishes to collaborate with NSF in a simultaneous news release, arrangements may be made through the NSF s Office of Legislative and Public Affairs, Public Affairs Group, telephone 703 292 8070. 3. Travel and Temporary Dependent Care Costs Travel, meal, and hotel expenses of recipient employees who are not on travel status are unallowable. Costs of employees on travel status are limited to those specifically authorized by 2 CFR 200.475. Temporary dependent care costs a dependent is defined in 26 USC 152 above and beyond regular dependent care that directly results from travel to conferences are allowable costs provided that the costs are a. a direct result of the individual s travel for the NSF conference award b. consistent with the recipient s documented travel policy for all employee travel and c. only temporary during the travel period. See 2 CFR 200.475 for additional information on travel costs.  Proposal Award Policies Procedures Guide X 5 NSF 23 1 D. Indirect Costs 1. NSF Policy a. Except as noted in an NSF program solicitation, it is NSF policy that recipients are entitled to reimbursement from award funds for indirect costs F A allocable to the NSF share of allowable direct costs of a project. NSF program staff are not authorized to negotiate indirect costs as a discrete item of a proposal budget. NSF program staff also are not authorized to suggest or request that PIs seek reductions or waivers of indirect costs. b. The awarded indirect cost rate is generally based upon a recipient s current Federally negotiated indirect cost rate agreement. When establishing an indirect rate for an award where the domestic recipient does not have a current negotiated rate agreement, NSF will consider the rate proposed in the budget, the recipient s indirect cost proposal submission, the amount of total funding requested and other pertinent financial factors. Supporting documentation is not required for organizations that request a de minimis rate of 10 or less of modified total direct costs. Foreign recipients that do not have a U.S. Federally negotiated indirect cost rate are limited to a de minimis indirect cost rate recovery of 10 of modified total direct costs. Foreign recipients that have a negotiated rate agreement with a U.S. Federal agency may recover indirect costs at the current negotiated rate. Since some types of rates limit indirect cost recoveries and require adjustments, recipients receiving awards should ensure that they understand the type of indirect cost rate, the applicable base and the type of rate used in the award. Types of indirect cost rates that are most frequently used on NSF awards are as follows i Predetermined Rate As authorized by 41 USC 4708 and recommended by the Federal cost principles in 2 CFR 200, Appendices III, IV, and VI, NSF has elected to use predetermined rates, where appropriate. A predetermined rate is an indirect cost rate, applicable to a specified current or future period, usually the organization s fiscal year. A predetermined rate is not subject to adjustment. In rare circumstances where recipients receive limited NSF funding, the Foundation may elect to set award specific rates as opposed to a formal annual negotiated indirect cost rate agreement. In these cases, the award notice will specify the rate type and application base. ii Provisional or billing rate A provisional rate is a temporary indirect cost rate applicable to a specified period which is used for funding, interim reimbursement, and reporting indirect costs pending the establishment of a final rate for the period. Recipients with provisional rates are required to submit indirect cost proposals to their cognizant Federal Agency for rate negotiation within six months after the close of each fiscal year. Adjustments to awards for amounts previously billed at provisional rates are required after final indirect cost rates are established. iii Final rate A final rate is an indirect cost rate applicable to a specified past period which is based on the actual costs of the period. A final rate is not subject to adjustment. Special Limitation concerning Colleges and Universities subject to 2 CFR 200 Appendix III, paragraph C.7 This section contains an additional restriction on recovery of indirect costs for institutions of higher education. For these entities, the negotiated rate at the time the award is made shall be used throughout the life of the award. The applicable text from 2 CFR 200 Appendix III, paragraph C.7 is repeated below 7. Fixed Rates for the Life of the Sponsored Agreement.  Proposal Award Policies Procedures Guide X 6 NSF 23 1 Except as provided in paragraph c 1 of 200.414, Federal agencies must use the negotiated rates in effect at the time of the initial award throughout the life of the Federal award. Award levels for Federal awards may not be adjusted in future years as a result of changes in negotiated rates. Negotiated rates per the rate agreement include final, fixed, and predetermined rates and exclude provisional rates. Life for the purpose of this subsection means each competitive segment of a project. A competitive segment is a period of years approved by the Federal awarding agency at the time of the award. If negotiated rate agreements do not extend through the life of the Federal award at the time of the initial award, then the negotiated rate for the last year of the award must be extended through the end of the life of the Federal award. c. NSF will not amend an award solely to provide additional funds for changes in indirect cost rates. d. NSF will generally fund continuing grant increments and supplemental support using the negotiated indirect cost rate s approved at the time of the initial award. See Chapter VI.E. e. Any negotiations with respect to business and financial matters on specific awards, including the amount of indirect cost reimbursement, are conducted by the cognizant Grants and Agreements Officer with an authorized official of the recipient s organization. It is the responsibility of the recipient to ensure that its negotiated indirect cost rate agreements remain current. When a recipient does not have a current negotiated indirect cost rate in effect at the time of award but had a previous indirect cost rate agreement, the cognizant Grants and Agreements Officer may elect to use the most recently negotiated rate for award funding purposes or may request that the proposal budget be revised to apply the de minimis rate of 10 to modified total direct costs MTDC . The NSF Cost Analysis and Pre Award Review Branch in the Division of Institution and Award Support provides advisory assistance to the Grants and Agreements Officer. 2. NSF Cognizant Organizations NSF negotiates rates for those recipients over which it holds rate cognizance. For NSF to be the cognizant agency for indirect costs, NSF must provide the preponderance of a recipient s direct federal funding. NSF does not negotiate rates for recipients who do not hold direct NSF funding or for those entities serving only as subrecipients. Organizations for which NSF is the cognizant agency must keep their rate agreements current. Recipients with provisional to final rate agreements are required to submit indirect cost rate proposals, prepared in accordance with NSF proposal submission requirements, within six months after the end of their fiscal year. Organizations that are unable to submit their indirect cost rate proposal within this time frame should request a submission extension. Failure to maintain a currently negotiated indirect cost rate agreement could lead to NSF restricting budgeted indirect costs to the 10 de minimus rate applied to the MTDC base. See the Indirect Cost Rate Proposal Submission Procedures site for indirect cost rate proposal submission requirements. The submission of indirect cost rate proposals and requests for submission extensions should be sent to bfacapidc nsf.gov.  Proposal Award Policies Procedures Guide X 7 NSF 23 1 E. Fee Payments under NSF Awards Payment of fees profit is allowable only if expressly authorized by solicitation and the terms and conditions of the NSF award. F. Prohibition on Certain Telecommunications and Video Surveillance Services or Equipment Section 889 of the National Defense Authorization Act NDAA for Fiscal Year FY 2019 Public Law 115 232 prohibits the head of an executive agency from obligating or expending loan or award funds to procure or obtain, extend, or renew a contract to procure or obtain, or enter into a contract or extend or renew a contract to procure or obtain the equipment, services, or systems as identified in section 889 of the NDAA for FY 2019. a In accordance with 2 CFR 200.216 and 200.471, for all awards that are issued on or after August 13, 2020, recipients and subrecipients are prohibited from obligating or expending loan or award funds to 1 Procure or obtain 2 Extend or renew a contract to procure or obtain or 3 Enter into a contract or extend or renew a contract to procure or obtain equipment, services, or systems that uses covered telecommunications equipment or services as a substantial or essential component of any system, or as critical technology as part of any system. As described in Public Law 115 232, section 889, covered telecommunications equipment is telecommunications equipment produced by Huawei Technologies Company or ZTE Corporation or any subsidiary or affiliate of such entities . i For the purpose of public safety, security of government facilities, physical security surveillance of critical infrastructure, and other national security purposes, video surveillance and telecommunications equipment produced by Hytera Communications Corporation, Hangzhou Hikvision Digital Technology Company, or Dahua Technology Company or any subsidiary or affiliate of such entities . ii Telecommunications or video surveillance services provided by such entities or using such equipment. iii Telecommunications or video surveillance equipment or services produced or provided by an entity that the Secretary of Defense, in consultation with the Director of the National Intelligence or the Director of the Federal Bureau of Investigation, reasonably believes to be an entity owned or controlled by, or otherwise connected to, the government of a covered foreign country. b In implementing the prohibition under Public Law 115 232, section 889, subsection f , paragraph 1 , heads of executive agencies administering loan, award, or subsidy programs shall prioritize available funding and technical support to assist affected businesses, institutions and organizations as is reasonably necessary for those affected entities to transition from covered communications equipment and services, to procure replacement equipment and services, and to ensure that communications service to users and customers is sustained. c See Public Law 115 232, section 889 for additional information.  Proposal Award Policies Procedures Guide XI 1 NSF 23 1 Chapter XI Other Post Award Requirements and Considerations A. Non Discrimination Statutes and Regulations 1. General a. A number of statutes prohibit NSF recipients from discriminating against individuals who participate in any of their programs, services, and activities. These statutes include Title VI of the Civil Rights Act of 1964 prohibits discrimination on the basis of race, color, or national origin Section 504 of the Rehabilitation Act of 1973 prohibits discrimination on the basis of disability Title IX of the Educational Amendments of 1972 prohibits discrimination on the basis of sex in Federally assisted education programs or activities and the Age Discrimination Act of 1975 prohibits discrimination on the basis of age . In addition to statutory prohibitions, Executive Order E.O. 11246 bars various types of discriminatory employment practices under awards for construction, and E.O. 13166 Improving Access to Services for Persons with Limited English Proficiency LEP requires government agencies to take steps to provide meaningful access to its programs and activities to members of the public who are limited in their English proficiency, including recipients programs and activities. The following sections discuss the application of each of these Statutes and E.O. 11246 and E.O. 13166 to NSF recipients. b. When NSF receives a complaint alleging discrimination under any of these statutes, NSF may refer the complaint to the recipient or another entity with authority or jurisdiction to investigate the complaint when the complaint does not meet NSF requirements of acceptance for investigation. In this instance, when the complaint is referred to the recipient by NSF, the recipient shall acknowledge receipt to NSF of the referred complaint and inform NSF of the final disposition of the complaint. Information on the complaint process can be found on the OECR website. The complainant may also use the recipient s internal discrimination complaint process. Such processes are required for NSF recipients to implement under Title IX for sex discrimination complaints, including sexual harassment and under Section 504 for disability discrimination complaints. Recipients are prohibited by these regulations from engaging in acts of intimidation, coercion or retaliation against a any person who attempts to assert a right protected by these statutes and their implementing regulations or b cooperates in any part of NSF s review, investigation and compliance resolution or enforcement process. c. NSF proposers and recipients are required under these regulations to keep records deemed pertinent to ascertain a recipient s compliance with these regulations. It also requires the recipient to submit to NSF timely, complete and accurate reports, and in such form and containing such information, as NSF may determine to be necessary to ascertain whether the recipient has complied or is complying with these regulations. d. NSF proposers and recipients are advised that NSF may conduct pre award and post award compliance reviews to ensure that the recipient is complying with NSF s civil rights regulations. Recipients are required to provide NSF with access to information, records, recipient officials, recipient program participants, and facilities deemed pertinent by NSF to ascertain a recipient s compliance with these regulations. e. NSF proposers and recipients are required under these regulations to make available to its participants, beneficiaries, and other interested persons, information regarding these regulations and their applicability to the program s under which the recipient receives Federal financial assistance from NSF.  Proposal Award Policies Procedures Guide XI 2 NSF 23 1 Proposers and recipients are also required to make such information available to these parties in such a manner as NSF finds necessary to apprise such persons of the protections against discrimination assured them by these regulations. f. NSF proposers and recipients may contact the Office of Equity and Civil Rights OECR at the link in b above or at 1 703 292 8020 with any questions regarding these non discrimination statutes and their implementing NSF regulations and their applicability to their institutions programs, services, and activities. g. NSF Policy on Sexual Harassment, Other Forms of Harassment, or Sexual Assault As the primary funding agency of fundamental science and engineering research in the U.S., NSF is committed to promoting safe, productive research and education environments for current and future scientists and engineers. The Foundation considers the PI and any co PIs identified on an NSF award to be in positions of trust. The PI and co PI s and all award personnel must comport themselves in a responsible and accountable manner during the performance of award activities whether at the recipient organization, on line, or conducted outside the organization, such as at field sites, or facilities, or during conferences and workshops. The 3,000 U.S. IHEs and other organizations that receive NSF funding are responsible for fully investigating complaints and for compliance with federal non discrimination laws, regulations, and executive orders. In support of this position, the Foundation has taken steps to bolster our commitment to a safe research environment, including development and implementation of an award term and condition that requires NSF to be notified 1 of any findings determinations regarding the PI or co PIs that demonstrate a violation of awardee codes of conduct, policies, regulations or statutes relating to sexual harassment, other forms of harassment, or sexual assault or 2 if the awardee places the PI, or co PIs on administrative leave or imposes an administrative action relating to a finding or investigation of a violation of awardee policies, codes of conduct, statutes or regulations relating to sexual harassment, other forms of harassment, or sexual assault. See Chapter VII.B.3 for additional information on the notification process. NSF expects all research organizations to establish and maintain clear and unambiguous standards of behavior to ensure harassment free workplaces wherever science is conducted. NSF has developed a sexual harassment prevention website that includes promising practices on policies, effective codes of conduct, and standards of behavior, as well as Frequently Asked Questions that respond to inquiries received on this complex topic. A community effort is essential to eliminate sexual and other forms of harassment in science and to build scientific workspaces where people can learn, grow, and thrive. h. Award Condition Each NSF research award includes as part of the award general terms and conditions an article that implements the notification requirements and harassment policy specified above. 2. Title VI of the Civil Rights Act of 1964 a. Background Section 602 of the Civil Rights Act of 1964 42 USC 2000d, et seq. provides that no person in the U.S. shall, on the grounds of race, color, or national origin, be excluded from participation in, be denied the benefits of, or be otherwise subjected to discrimination under any program or activity receiving Federal financial assistance. Section 602 requires that each Government agency which is empowered to extend such financial assistance issue rules or regulations implementing Title VI with respect to such programs or activities administered by the agency.  Proposal Award Policies Procedures Guide XI 3 NSF 23 1 b. NSF Regulations NSF regulations implementing Title VI are found at 45 CFR 611. These regulations apply to recipients, subrecipients and successors in interest. These regulations do not apply to contracts for commercially available materials and supplies, equipment, or general support services. c. Key Procedural and Programmatic Requirements The procedures for ensuring NSF recipients compliance with Title VI are found at 45 CFR 611.6 11. These regulations provide for the compliance and investigative actions that NSF may initiate in order to ascertain recipients compliance with Title VI. These regulations also provide for the enforcement procedures to compel recipient compliance with Title VI if a recipient refuses to take corrective action for violations found during an NSF complaint investigation or compliance review. NSF s Section 504, Title IX and Age Discrimination Act regulations incorporate by reference the Title VI compliance, investigative and enforcement procedures. 3. Section 504 of the Rehabilitation Act of 1973 a. Background Section 504 of the Rehabilitation Act of 1973, as amended 29 USC 794 provides that no otherwise qualified individual with a disability in the United States...shall, solely by reason of her or his disability, be excluded from the participation in, be denied the benefits of, or be subjected to discrimination under any program or activity receiving Federal financial assistance. b. NSF Regulations NSF regulations implementing Section 504 are found at 45 CFR 605. With a few changes, these regulations mirror the regulations issued by the Department of Health and Human Services DHHS at 45 CFR 84. These regulations also apply to subrecipients and successors in interest. These regulations do not apply to contracts for commercially available materials and supplies, equipment, or general support services. c. Key Procedural and Programmatic Requirements NSF s Section 504 regulations, in addition to prohibiting discrimination on the basis of disability, requires NSF recipients to designate a Section 504 coordinator, publish and adopt procedures to investigate and adjudicate complaints of internally filed disability discrimination complaints, and notify the public of its obligation to comply with Section 504. NSF s Section 504 regulation also requires NSF recipients to conduct a self evaluation to determine the accessibility of its programs, services, activities and facilities, and implement modifications, implement corrective actions identified from the self evaluation and conduct a transition plan to identify those physical elements of the NSF recipient s facilities that are inaccessible to individuals with disabilities and require retrofit. NSF s Section 504 regulations also require that all new construction and alterations to existing facilities are accessible to individuals with disabilities and meet current accessibility standards. See 45 CFR 605 for all of the regulatory requirements for NSF recipients. 4. Title IX of the Education Amendments of 1972 a. Background Subject to exceptions regarding admission policies at certain religious and military organizations, Title IX of the Education Amendments of 1972 20 USC 1681 1686 prohibits discrimination on the basis of sex in any education program or activity receiving Federal financial assistance.  Proposal Award Policies Procedures Guide XI 4 NSF 23 1 On August 14, 2020, the U.S. Department of Education s DoED revised regulations implementing Title IX went into effect 34 CFR 106 . Recipients are advised that this action did not change NSF s Title IX regulations. NSF recipients also may be recipients of DoED funding and will have the responsibility to comply with both DoED s and NSF s Title IX regulations. In Title IX compliance activities involving recipients that fall under the jurisdiction of both NSF and DoED, NSF will determine whether the recipient is in compliance with NSF s Title IX regulations only. Recipients are advised that a determination by NSF that the recipient is in compliance or non compliance with NSF Title IX regulations does not mean that the recipient is in compliance with DoED s Title IX regulations. Recipients with Title IX compliance obligations to DoED are encouraged to contact DoED s Office for Civil Rights if there are questions or concerns regarding compliance with DoED s revised Title IX regulations. b. NSF Regulations NSF regulations implementing Title IX are found at 45 CFR 618. All NSF recipients who provide or operate educational programs as defined in 45 CFR 618.105 must comply with Title IX. These regulations also apply to subrecipients and successors in interest who operate such educational programs. These regulations do not apply to contracts for commercially available materials and supplies, equipment, or general support services. c. Key Procedural and Programmatic Requirements NSF s Title IX regulations, in addition to prohibiting discrimination on the basis of sex in education programs, requires NSF recipients to designate a Title IX coordinator, publish and adopt procedures to investigate and adjudicate complaints of internally filed sex discrimination complaints, notify the public of its obligation to comply with Title IX, conduct a self evaluation to determine whether its programs, services, activities and facilities comply with Title IX and implement corrective actions identified from the self evaluation. See 45 CFR 618 for all of the regulatory requirements for NSF recipients under Title IX. 5. Age Discrimination Act of 1975 a. Background The Age Discrimination Act of 1975, as amended 42 USC 6101 et seq. , provides that pursuant to regulations issued by DHHS no person in the United States shall, on the basis of age, be excluded from participation in, be denied the benefits of, or be subjected to discrimination under, any program or activity receiving Federal financial assistance. b. NSF Regulations NSF regulations implementing the Age Discrimination Act are found at 45 CFR 617. These regulations also apply to subrecipients and successors in interest. These regulations do not apply to contracts for commercially available materials and supplies, equipment, or general support services. c. Key Procedural and Programmatic Requirements NSF s Age Discrimination Act regulations, in addition to prohibiting discrimination on the basis of age in education programs, requires NSF recipients conduct a self evaluation to determine each recipient shall identify all age distinctions it uses and justify each age distinction it imposes on the program or activity receiving Federal financial assistance from NSF. See 45 CFR 617 for all of the regulatory requirements under the Age Discrimination Act for NSF recipients.  Proposal Award Policies Procedures Guide XI 5 NSF 23 1 6. Equal Employment Opportunity under E.O. 11246 a. Background E.O. 11246, as amended, requires contractors and subcontractors performing Federally assisted construction projects to provide equal opportunity, without regard to race, color, religion, sex, or national origin, to persons employed or seeking employment with them. This E.O. may apply to some NSF awards for construction. E.O. 11246 is enforced by the U.S. Department of Labor s Office of Federal Contract Compliance Programs. b. Award Condition In instances when E.O. 11246 is applicable, the award will include an equal opportunity article in conformance with regulations issued by the Secretary of Labor at 41 CFR 60. 7. Limited English Proficiency under E.O. 13166 a. Background E.O. 13166 requires Federal agencies and NSF recipients to take steps to provide meaningful access to its programs and activities to program participants who are limited English proficient LEP . The failure to ensure that LEP persons can effectively participate in or benefit from Federally assisted programs and activities may violate the prohibition under Title VI of the Civil Rights Act of 1964 and NSF s Title VI implementing regulations against national origin discrimination. The U.S. Department of Justice has published guidance to assist NSF recipients in their efforts to comply with Title VI when providing LEP individuals with access to recipient programs, services and activities. b. Award Condition In instances when E.O. 13166 is applicable, NSF recipients should contact NSF s LEP Coordinator within the Office of Diversity and Inclusion for guidance at 2415 Eisenhower Avenue, Alexandria, VA 22314. B. Protection of Living Organisms 1. Human Subjects a. Background The recipient is responsible for the protection of the rights and welfare of human subjects involved in activities supported by NSF. All research involving human subjects supported or otherwise subject to regulation by any Federal agency is covered by a policy set forth in the Common Rule, Protection of Human Subjects For projects lacking definite plans for the use of human subjects pursuant to 45 CFR 690.118, NSF can accept a determination from an IRB that stipulates that no work with human subjects, including recruitment, may be conducted until full IRB approval is obtained. Complete instructions on preparation and submission of proposals that involve use of human subjects are available in Chapter II.D.5. b. NSF Regulation i NSF s Common Rule on Protection of Human Subjects is available on the NSF website. ii During the life of the award, additional IRB approval must be obtained if the protocols for the use of human subject have been changed substantively from those originally proposed and approved. When an additional IRB approval is required, the organization must provide to the cognizant NSF Program Officer a new IRB approval letter indicating approval of the covered activities, for example by explicitly referencing the title and or award number of the award. In the event the recipient s FWA is canceled or lapses, the  Proposal Award Policies Procedures Guide XI 6 NSF 23 1 recipient must immediately notify the cognizant NSF Grants and Agreements Officer identified in the award. iii Supplements to existing awards do not require a separate IRB approval letter. If the scope of the project has been substantively changed from the award, however, a new signed IRB approval letter is required, indicating approval of the covered activities, and explicitly referencing the title of the award. c. Award Condition Each NSF award contains as part of the award general terms and conditions, an article implementing NSF regulations on projects involving research with human subjects. In addition, each award notice contains the following language relating to a recipient s responsibilities regarding the use of human subjects during the life of the award It is the recipient s responsibility to ensure that any human subjects work conducted under this award has an Institutional Review Board IRB approval, where required, and that such approval remains valid at all times that human subjects work is conducted under the award. Failure to comply with this condition will result in suspension and or termination of the award. 2. Research Involving Recombinant or Synthetic Nucleic Acid Molecules a. Applicability This section applies to all research, for which NSF award funds are used, that falls within the scope of the Guidelines for Research Involving Recombinant DNA or Synthetic Nucleic Acid Molecules NIH Guidelines , as amended in April 2019, hereafter referred to as the Guidelines . b. Policy NSF recipients performing research within the U.S. that falls within the scope of the Guidelines shall comply with the Guidelines, including the procedural requirements and any subsequent revisions as they are published in the Federal Register. Recipient responsibilities include i Each organization involved in the conduct of NSF supported recombinant or synthetic nucleic acid research subject to the Guidelines must have a standing Institutional Biosafety Committee IBC as specified in Section IV of the Guidelines. ii Recombinant or synthetic nucleic acid research subject to the Guidelines must be registered with the IBC indicating compliance with the containment requirements specified in Part III of the Guidelines. IBCs are required to keep records of recombinant or synthetic nucleic acid research conducted at their organization in a form that is available to NSF upon request. c. Research Requiring Prior Approval In certain instances, research should not be initiated or registered with IBCs prior to approval and determination of containment level by the Director, NIH. Normally such experiments are reviewed by the Recombinant DNA Advisory Committee before a decision is made by the Director, NIH. Such instances are i research for which containment levels are not explicitly specified by the Guidelines ii research involving experiments prohibited by the Guidelines, i.e., requests for exceptions to the Guidelines and iii requests to perform experiments without regard to the containment specified in the Guidelines, i.e., exemptions from the Guidelines.  Proposal Award Policies Procedures Guide XI 7 NSF 23 1 3. Live Vertebrate Animals a. Background The recipient is responsible for the humane care and treatment of any live vertebrate animal used or intended for use in such activities as field or laboratory research, development, training, experiments, biological testing, or for related purposes supported by NSF awards. b. Federal Regulations i Any recipient performing research on live vertebrate animals73 shall comply with the Animal Welfare Act 7 USC 2131 et seq. and the regulations promulgated thereunder by the Secretary of Agriculture 9 CFR 1.1 4.11 pertaining to the humane care, handling, and treatment of live vertebrate animals held or used for research, teaching, or other activities supported by Federal awards. The recipient is expected to ensure that the guidelines described in the National Academies of Science, Engineering and Medicine NASEM Publication, Guide for the Care and Use of Laboratory Animals are followed and to comply with the Public Health Service Policy and Government Principles Regarding the Care and Use of Animals included as Appendix D to the NASEM Guide . Taxon specific guidelines may be used as supplemental references.74 Departures from the Guide must be approved by the Institutional Animal Care and Use Committee IACUC and based on scientific, veterinary, medical, or animal welfare issues for more information, see OLAW Departures from the Guide . ii During the life of the award, additional IACUC approval must be obtained if the protocols for the care or the use of live vertebrate animals have been changed substantively from those originally proposed and approved. When an additional IACUC approval is required, the organization must provide to the cognizant NSF Program Officer a signed copy of a new IACUC approval letter indicating approval of the covered activities and explicitly referencing the title of the award. In the event the recipient s PHS approved Animal Welfare Assurance is canceled or lapses, the recipient must immediately notify the cognizant NSF Grants and Agreements Officer identified in the award. iii Supplements to existing awards do not require a separate IACUC approval letter. If the scope of the project has been substantively changed from the parent award, however, a new signed IACUC approval letter is required. iv Awards to U.S. recipients for projects involving the care or use of live vertebrate animals at a foreign institution or foreign field site also require approval of research protocols by the U.S. recipient s IACUC. If the project is to be funded through an award to a foreign organization or through an individual fellowship award that will support activities at a foreign organization, NSF will require a statement from the international organization explicitly listing the proposer s name and referencing the title of the award to confirm that activities will be conducted in accordance with all applicable laws in the foreign country and that the International Guiding Principles for Biomedical Research Involving Animals will be followed. c. Award Condition Each NSF award contains as part of the award general terms and conditions, an article implementing NSF regulations on projects involving research with live vertebrate animals. In addition, each award notice contains the following language relating to a recipient s responsibilities regarding the care or use of live vertebrate animals during the life of the award 73 In addition to live vertebrate animals covered by the Animal Welfare Act, the requirements specified in this coverage also are extended to rats, birds, and mice. 74 Guidelines to the Use of Wild Birds in Research Guidelines of the American Society of Mammalogists for the Use of Wild Mammals in Research Guidelines for the Use of Fishes in Research Guidelines for the Use of Live Amphibians and Reptiles in Field and Laboratory Research.  Proposal Award Policies Procedures Guide XI 8 NSF 23 1 It is the recipient s responsibility to ensure that any live vertebrate animal work conducted under this award has Institutional Animal Care and Use Committee IACUC approval, where required, that the approval be from an organization that has a current Public Health Service approved Animal Welfare Assurance, and that such approval remains valid at all times that live vertebrate animal work is conducted under the award. See NSF PAPPG Chapter II.D.4, for additional information. This condition extends to live vertebrate animal work funded via use of a subaward. Failure to comply with this article will result in suspension and or termination of the award. 4. Government Permits and Activities Abroad a. For awards that include activities requiring permits from appropriate Federal, State, or local government authorities, the recipient should obtain any required permits prior to undertaking the proposed activities. b. The recipient should ensure that activities carried on outside the U.S. are coordinated as necessary with appropriate U.S. and foreign government authorities and that necessary licenses, permits or approvals are obtained prior to undertaking proposed activities. NSF does not assume responsibility for recipient compliance with the laws and regulations of the country in which the work is to be conducted. 5. Potential Life Sciences Dual Use Research of Concern DURC a. Applicability This section applies to all research, for which NSF award funds may be used, that potentially falls within the scope of the U.S. Government Policy for Institutional Oversight of Life Sciences Dual Use Research of Concern as published in September 2014, and or would fall under the Department of Health and Human Services Framework for Guiding Decisions about Proposed Research Involving Enhanced Potential Pandemic Pathogens, as published in January 2017, hereafter referred to as the Policy . b. NSF Implementation of the Policy NSF is committed to preserving the benefits of life sciences research while minimizing the risk of misuse of the knowledge, information, products, or technologies provided by such research. The purpose of NSF s implementation of this Policy is to clarify recipient expectations about NSF funded research with certain high consequence pathogens and toxins with potential to be considered dual use research of concern. Recipients are responsible for monitoring the research progress and for implementation of all appropriate biosafety and biosecurity risk mitigation measures including compliance with all applicable laws and regulations related to that implementation, including the Policy specified above. While the White House Office of Science and Technology Policy has lifted the research funding pause on gain of function research as of January 2017, NSF will not consider funding research that would lead to a gain of function for agents associated with the U.S. Government Policy on Dual Use Research of Concern. NSF will not fund research that involves the creation, transfer, or use of enhanced potential pandemic pathogens except under special circumstances where the potential benefits to society far outweigh the risks and all other conditions of the Policy are met. i Each organization involved in the conduct of NSF supported research that utilizes select agents or other enhanced potential pandemic pathogens, as defined by the Policy, must have a standing Institutional Biosafety Committee IBC or other Institutional Review Entity IRE whose role is the review of research involving agents covered by the Policy.  Proposal Award Policies Procedures Guide XI 9 NSF 23 1 ii Use of the select agents or other potential pandemic pathogens as defined by the Policy must be registered with the CDC or USDA as directed under the Select Agent Regulations. Documentation demonstrating appropriate registration of the agent must be submitted to NSF prior to issuance of the award. iii In the rare cases where NSF funds research that involves the creation, transfer, or use of enhanced potential pandemic pathogens, then special award conditions will be applied to ensure adequate oversite by the cognizant NSF program officer or other NSF official. Award terms and conditions also will specify the establishment of a risk mitigation plan for the research that must be reviewed and approved by the IRE and NSF, as well as the requirement of maintenance of records of institutional review of the research and risk mitigation activities for three years after completion of the project. C. Construction, Rearrangements and Reconversions 1. Davis Bacon Act The Davis Bacon Act 40 USC 276a et seq. establishes minimum wages to be paid to laborers and mechanics on construction contracts to which the U.S. is a party involving public buildings or public works within the U.S. A number of other statutes have extended this provision to specific Federal award programs involving construction. However, unless specifically stated in the award, the Davis Bacon Act does not normally apply to NSF awards since recipients normally retain title to property acquired under the award and the construction, if any, is normally on non Government land. 2. Bonding and Insurance The NSF Act 42 USC 1870c provides NSF with authority to enter into grants, contracts or other agreements without performance or other bonds. Therefore, unless the award specifically provides otherwise, NSF does not require performance or other bonds or insurance. 3. Seismic Safety of Buildings E.O. 12699 Seismic Safety of Federal and Federally assisted or Regulated New Building Construction dated January 5, 1990, requires that consideration be given to seismic hazards in the design of buildings. Very seldom are NSF recipients involved with Federally assisted construction and rarely are new buildings involved. NSF ensures compliance with the Order through its recipients by inclusion of a specific award condition in any appropriate award. D. Intellectual Property 1. Patents and Inventions a. Background i The disposition of rights to inventions made by small business firms, large business firms, and non profit organizations, including universities and other institutions of higher education, during NSF assisted research is governed by Chapter 18 of Title 35 of the USC, commonly called the Bayh Dole Act and EO 12591, as amended by E.O. 12618. In accordance with a Presidential Memorandum entitled, Government Patent Policy issued on February 18, 1983, and under the authority of Section 12 of the National Science Foundation Act of 1950, as amended 42 USC 1871 , NSF applies the policies of the Bayh Dole Act to all its recipients. The Department of Commerce DOC is the lead agency for implementing the Bayh Dole Act and has published guidance to Federal agencies in 37 CFR 401. This policy serves as NSF s implementation of 37 CFR 401 and updates to incorporate changes effective May 14, 2018.  Proposal Award Policies Procedures Guide XI 10 NSF 23 1 ii NSF s standard Patent Rights terms and conditions are identical to that prescribed in the DOC guidance 37 CFR 401.14 except for modifications and tailoring allowed pursuant to section 401.5 of the DOC guidance 37 CFR 401.5 a pursuant to section 401.5 c of the DOC guidance 37 CFR 401.5 c , NSF has tailored the article to apply to awards and to identify NSF b as permitted by Section 401.5 d of the DOC guidance 37 CFR 401.5 d , NSF has added to paragraph b. of the article a stipulation that NSF reserves the right to direct a recipient to transfer to a foreign government or research performer such rights to any subject invention as are required to comply with any international treaty or agreement identified when the award is made as being applicable to the assisted research c as permitted by Section 401.5 f of the DOC guidance 37 CFR 401.5 f , NSF has added a subparagraph to the end of paragraph f. of the article to require recipients or their representatives to send NSF confirmations of the Government licenses for subject inventions and the page of any U.S. patent application that contains the Federal support article d since NSF normally uses the same article for all subrecipients, the first two subparagraphs of paragraph g. of the article specified in the DOC guidance have been reduced to one e paragraph c.1 of the article has been changed to require that invention disclosures be submitted electronically via the iEdison system f paragraph l. of the article has been changed to require that all communications required by the Patents Rights article be submitted electronically via the iEdison system unless prior permission is obtained from the NSF Patent Assistant and g in accordance with paragraph 401.5 g of the DOC guidance 37 CFR 401.5 g , paragraph k.3 of the article is substituted when the award is made to a non profit organization for the operation of a government owned, contractor operated facility. b. National Science Foundation Patent Policy As authorized by the NSB, the Director of NSF has adopted the following NSF patent policy In accordance with the Bayh Dole Act and the Presidential Memorandum entitled Government Patent Policy issued February 18, 1983, NSF will use the Patent Rights article prescribed by DOC at 37 CFR 401.14 in all of its awards for the performance of experimental, developmental or research work, including awards made to foreign entities, with such modifications and tailoring allowed pursuant to section 401.5 of the DOC guidance 37 CFR 401.5 , unless NSF determines, consistent with sections 401.3 a 2 and a 6 of the DOC guidance 37 CFR 401.3 a 2 and a 6 , that some other provision would better serve the purposes of that Act or the interests of the US and the general public. c. Standard Patent Rights Article Each NSF award contains as part of the award general terms and conditions, an article implementing the standard patent rights article. d. Special patent provisions i At the request of the prospective recipient, or on recommendation from the cognizant NSF Program Officer, the cognizant NSF Grants and Agreements Officer may negotiate special patent provisions when it has been determined that exceptional circumstances require restriction or elimination of the right of a prospective recipient to retain title to any subject invention in order to better promote the policy and objectives of chapter 18 of title 35 of the USC or the National Science Foundation Act. The cognizant Grants  Proposal Award Policies Procedures Guide XI 11 NSF 23 1 and Agreements Officer will prepare the written determination required by 37 CFR 401.3 e and ensure that appropriate reports are made to the Secretary of Commerce and Chief Counsel for Advocacy of the Small Business Administration as required in 37 CFR 401.3 f . Unless doing so would be inconsistent with an obligation imposed on the Foundation by statute, international agreement, or pact with other participants in or supporters of the research, every special patent provision will allow the recipient, after an invention has been made, to request that it be allowed to retain principal rights to that invention in accordance procedures at D.1.j. v below. ii If the award is made to a non profit organization and is for the operation of a government owned, contractor operated facility, the following will be substituted for the text of paragraph k 3 of the Patent Rights article at 37 CFR 401.14 After payment of patenting costs, licensing costs, payments to inventors, and other expenses incidental to the administration of subject inventions, the balance of any royalties or income earned and retained by the contractor during any fiscal year on subject inventions under this or any successor contract containing the same requirement, up to any amount equal to five percent of the budget of the facility for that fiscal year, shall be used by the contractor for scientific research, development, and education consistent with the research and development mission and objectives of the facility, including activities that increase the licensing potential of other inventions of the facility. If the balance exceeds five percent, 15 percent of the excess above five percent shall be paid by the contractor to the Treasury of the United States and the remaining 85 percent shall be used by the contractor only for the same purposes as described in the preceding sentence. To the extent it provides the most effective technology transfer, the licensing of subject inventions shall be administered by contractor employees on location at the facility. e. Awards Not Primarily for Research i Awards not primarily intended to support scientific or engineering research are not required to contain a patent provision. Examples of such awards are travel and conference grants. ii NSF fellowships and traineeships are primarily intended to support education or training, not particular research. Therefore, in accordance with section 212 of title 35 of the USC, the Foundation claims no rights to inventions made by fellows or trainees. The following provision will be included in each fellowship or traineeship program solicitation and made part of the award Intellectual Property Rights. The National Science Foundation claims no rights to any inventions or writings that might result from its fellowship or traineeship awards. However, fellows and trainees should be aware that NSF, another Federal agency, or some private party may acquire such rights through other support for particular research. Also, fellows and trainees should note their obligation to include an Acknowledgment and Disclaimer in any publication. f. Awards affected by International Agreements i Some NSF awards are made as part of international cooperative research programs. The agreements or treaties underlying many of these programs require an allocation of patent rights different from that provided by the Patent Rights article in 37 CFR 401.14. Therefore, as permitted by 37 CFR 401.5 d , paragraph b. of the standard Patent Rights article has been modified to provide that the Foundation may require the recipient to transfer to a foreign government or research performer such rights in any subject invention as are contemplated in the international agreement. The award must identify the applicable agreement or treaty. ii After an invention is disclosed to the NSF Patent Assistant, the recipient of an award subject to an international agreement will be informed as to what rights, if any, it must transfer to the foreign participants.  Proposal Award Policies Procedures Guide XI 12 NSF 23 1 Recipients also may request the cognizant NSF Program Officer to provide them with copies of the identified international agreements before or after accepting the award. g. Retention of Rights by the Inventor If a recipient elects not to retain rights to an invention, the inventor may request prior written approval from the NSF Patent Assistant to retain principal patent rights. Such requests should be made as soon as possible after the recipient notifies the NSF Patent Assistant that it does not intend to patent the invention. Such requests will normally be granted unless either the recipient or the employer of the inventor shows that it would be harmed by that action. As required by 37 CFR 401.9, the inventor will be subject to the same terms and conditions that would have been applied to the recipient, except that the special restrictions imposed on nonprofit organizations will not apply to the inventor. For purposes of this part, the term inventor means the individual s identified by the recipient as inventors when submitting an invention report to NSF in accordance with 37 CFR 401.14 c 1 . h. Unwanted Inventions i The Foundation will normally allow any patent rights not wanted by the recipient or inventor to be dedicated to the public through publication in scientific and engineering journals or, as a statutory invention registration under section 157 of title 35 of the USC. Except as provided in paragraph ii of this section, the NSF Patent Assistant will acknowledge a negative election by encouraging the recipient and inventor to promptly make all research results available to the scientific and engineering community. ii If the NSF Patent Assistant believes that another Federal agency is interested in the relevant technology, the NSF Patent Assistant may, after receiving the recipient s election not to patent and ascertaining that the inventor also does not want to patent, send a copy of the invention disclosure to that agency to give it an opportunity to review and patent the invention. Unless the agency expresses an interest in the invention within thirty days, the NSF Patent Assistant will acknowledge the recipient s negative election by encouraging prompt publication of all research results. If the agency does express an interest in patenting the invention, the NSF Patent Assistant will transfer to it all rights to the invention. i. Inventions also supported by another Federal Agency 37 CFR 401.13 a provides that in the event that an invention is made under awards made by more than one federal agency, the agencies involved will, at the request of the recipient or on their own initiative, designate one agency to be responsible for the administration of the invention. Whenever the NSF Patent Assistant finds that another agency also supported an NSF subject invention, the NSF Patent Assistant will consult with the recipient and appropriate personnel in the other agency to determine if a single agency should be designated to administer the Government s rights in the invention. The NSF Patent Assistant may transfer to, or accept from, any other Federal agency, responsibility for administering a jointly supported invention. j. Waivers and Approvals i Requests for extension of time to disclose to the NSF Patent Assistant, make an election to retain title to, or file a patent on a subject invention will be granted by the NSF Patent Assistant unless it is determined that such an extension would either imperil the securing of valid patent protection or unacceptably restrict the publication of the results of the NSF supported research. ii Approval of assignments by nonprofit organizations required by subparagraph k 1 of the Patent Rights article in 37 CFR 401.14 will be granted by the NSF Patent Assistant unless it is determined that the interests of the U.S. Government will be adversely affected by such assignment.  Proposal Award Policies Procedures Guide XI 13 NSF 23 1 iii Approval of long term exclusive licensing of NSF assisted inventions by nonprofit organizations will be granted by the NSF Patent Assistant unless it is determined that the interests of the U.S. Government will be adversely affected by such waiver. iv The preference for U.S. industry imposed by paragraph i of the Patent Rights article in 37 CFR 401.14 may be waived by the NSF Patent Assistant as provided in that paragraph. v Special restrictions on or limitation of the right of a recipient to retain title to subject inventions imposed under paragraph d. of this policy may be waived by the cognizant Grants and Agreements Officer whenever it is determined, after consultation with the cognizant Program Officer, that the reasons for imposing the restrictions or limitations do not require their application to a particular invention. vi Requests under paragraph i of this section for extensions of time to disclose, elect, or file may be made through the iEdison Invention Information Management System. A written request for extension of time to disclose, elect, or file can be assumed to have been approved unless the NSF Patent Assistant replies negatively within ten business days of the date such request was made. Requests for approvals or waivers under paragraphs ii , iii , iv , and v of this section must be in writing and should explain why an approval or waiver is justified under the stated criteria. The requester will be provided a written explanation of the reasons for denial of a request covered by this section. k. Small Business Preference Small business firms that believe a nonprofit organization is not meeting its obligations under paragraph k 4 of 37 CFR 401.14 may report their concerns to the NSF Office of Small and Disadvantaged Business Utilization. Requests should be in writing and provide the reasons for such concerns. l. Exercise of march in rights i The procedures established by this section supplement those prescribed by 37 CFR 401.6 and apply to all march in rights held by NSF including those resulting from funding agreements not covered by the Bayh Dole Act. ii Petitions requesting that NSF exercise a march in right should be addressed to the NSF Patent Assistant. Such petitions should a identify the patent or patent application involved and the relevant fields of use of the invention b state the grounds for the proposed march in c supply evidence that one or more of the four conditions creating a march in right lack of practical application, unsatisfied health or safety needs, unmet requirements for public use, or failure to prefer U.S. industry is present and d explain what action by the Foundation is necessary to correct that condition. iii If evidence received from a petitioner or from the Foundation s administration of the Patent Rights article indicates that one or more of the four conditions creating a march in right might exist, the NSF Patent Assistant will informally review the matter as provided in 37 CFR 401.6 b of the DOC implementing regulation. If that informal review indicates that one or more of the four conditions creating a march in right probably exists, the NSF Patent Assistant will initiate a formal march in proceeding by issuing a written notice to the patent holder. That notice will provide all the information required by 37 CFR 401.6 c of the DOC implementing regulation. The patent holder may submit information and argument in opposition to the proposed march in in person, in writing, or through a representative.  Proposal Award Policies Procedures Guide XI 14 NSF 23 1 iv If the NSF Patent Assistant determines that a genuine dispute over material facts exists, the disputed facts will be identified, and the NSF General Counsel will be notified. The NSF General Counsel will create a cross directorate fact finding panel, which will establish its own fact finding procedures within the requirements of 37 CFR 401.6 e of the DOC implementing regulation based on the dimensions of the particular dispute. The NSF Patent Assistant will serve as secretary to the panel but will not take part in its deliberations. Written findings of facts will be submitted to the NSF General Counsel, sent by certified mail to the patent holder, and made available to all other interested parties. v The NSF General Counsel will determine whether and how the Foundation should exercise a march in right as provided in 37 CFR 401.6 g . m. Request for conveyance of title to NSF i The procedures established by this section apply to the exercise of the Foundation s right under paragraph d of the Patent Rights article in 37 CFR 401.14 to request conveyance of title to a subject invention if certain conditions exist. ii The NSF Patent Assistant may request the recipient to convey to the Foundation or a designee title in one or more countries to any invention to which the recipient has elected not to retain title. The NSF Patent Assistant may request immediate conveyance of title to a subject invention if the recipient fails 1 to submit a timely invention disclosure 2 to make a timely election to retain patent rights or 3 to file a timely patent application but only if it is determined that such action is required to preserve patent rights. iii The NSF Patent Assistant will informally review any apparent failure by an recipient to comply with the requirements of paragraph c of the Patent Rights article in 37 CFR 401.14. The interested organization, the inventor, the patent holder, and any other interested party will be given an opportunity to explain why a particular invention was not disclosed, why an election was not made, or why a patent application was not filed. If the NSF Patent Assistant determines that a genuine dispute over material facts exists, a cross directorate fact finding panel will be appointed by the NSF General Counsel. The panel will establish its own fact finding procedures based on the dimensions of the particular dispute. Written findings of facts will be submitted to the NSF General Counsel, sent by certified mail to the patent holder, and made available to all other interested parties. iv The NSF General Counsel will determine whether the Foundation should request conveyance of title or if it should retain title obtained under section m. ii above. n. Appeals i All actions by the NSF Patent Assistant under section XI.D.1.g denying an inventor s request to retain rights to a subject invention, under XI.D.1.j denying a request for waiver, or under XI.D.1.m iv denying the existence of a material dispute may be appealed to the NSF General Counsel by an affected party within thirty days. A request under XI.D.1.m. ii to immediately convey title to the Foundation may be appealed to the Director, Division of Grants and Agreements DGA by the title holder within five days. ii All actions by a cognizant Grants and Agreements Officer refusing to eliminate restrictions on or limitation of the right of a recipient to retain title to subject inventions imposed under Chapter XI.D.1.d. of this policy may be appealed to the Director, Division of Acquisition and Cooperative Support DACS by an affected party within thirty days. iii A decision by the NSF General Counsel to exercise a march in right or to request conveyance of title may be appealed by the patent holder or any affected licensee to the NSF Deputy Director within thirty days. When a march in was initiated in response to a petition, the NSF General Counsel s decision not to exercise a march in right or to exercise it in a manner different from that requested in the petition may be appealed by the petitioner to the NSF Deputy Director within thirty days.  Proposal Award Policies Procedures Guide XI 15 NSF 23 1 iv In reviewing the actions of the NSF Patent Assistant, a Grants and Agreements Officer, or the NSF General Counsel, the DACS Division Director or NSF Deputy Director will consider both the factual and legal basis for the action or determination and its consistency with the policies and objectives of the Foundation and, if applicable, the Bayh Dole Act 35 USC 200 212 and the DOC implementing regulation at part 401 of title 37 of the Code of Federal Regulations. o. Background rights The Foundation will acquire rights to a research performer s pre existing technology only in exceptional circumstances where, due to the nature of the research being supported, the Foundation requires greater control over resulting inventions. The cognizant NSF Grants and Agreements Officer, with concurrence of the cognizant Program Officer, will negotiate a background rights provision. If the affected recipient is a small business firm or nonprofit organization, the provision will conform to the requirements of the Bayh Dole Act 35 USC 202 f as implemented by 37 CFR 401.12 . p. Subawards As provided in paragraph g of the Patent Rights article in 37 CFR 401.14, recipients should normally use that article in all subawards. At the request of the recipient or subrecipient or on recommendation from NSF staff, the cognizant Grants and Agreements Officer may direct the recipient to insert into subawards relating to scientific research a special patent provision negotiated under section XI.D.1.d i . q. Utilization reports Paragraph h of the standard Patent Rights article set forth in 37 CFR 401.14 obliges recipients to submit on request periodic reports no more frequently than annually on the utilization of a subject invention or on efforts at obtaining such utilization . At this time, the Foundation does not plan to request such reports of all recipients except in connection with march in investigations conducted under XI.D.1.l. or other circumstances requiring such reports as determined by the NSF Patent Assistant. This section will be amended to describe periodic reporting requirements if such are ever established. r. Delegation of authority The NSF General Counsel is responsible for implementing the NSF Patent Policy and is authorized to make any exceptions to or extensions of the NSF Patent Policy as may be required by particular circumstances. The NSF General Counsel will designate the NSF Patent Assistant and that individual is authorized to carry out the functions assigned. s. Electronic Invention Handling Recipients are required to use the iEdison System to disclose NSF subject inventions. Detailed instructions for use of that system are provided on the iEdison website and should be followed for NSF subject inventions except that i All communications required must be provided electronically as a pdf or TIFF file through iEdison unless prior permission for another form of submission is obtained from the NSF Patent Assistant. ii NSF does not require either an Annual Utilization Report or a Final Invention Statement and Certification. Questions on use of iEdison and requests for permission to submit material in other forms may be sent to the NSF Patent Assistant at patents nsf.gov, or at the Office of the General Counsel, National Science Foundation, 2415 Eisenhower Avenue, Alexandria, Virginia 22314.  Proposal Award Policies Procedures Guide XI 16 NSF 23 1 2. Copyright a. Rights to Copyrighted Material The following principles governing the treatment of copyrighted material produced under NSF awards were adopted by the NSB. i NSF normally will acquire only such rights to copyrighted material as are needed to achieve its purposes or to comply with the requirements of any applicable government wide policy or international agreement. ii To preserve incentives for private dissemination and development, NSF normally will not restrict, or take any part of income earned from, copyrighted material except as necessary to comply with the requirements of any applicable government wide policy or international agreement. iii In exceptional circumstances, NSF may restrict or eliminate a recipient s control of NSF supported copyrighted material and of income earned from it, if NSF determines that this would best serve the purposes of a particular program or award. b. Standard Copyrighted Material Article Unless a special article has been negotiated, each NSF award that relates to scientific or engineering research contains as part of the award general terms and conditions, an article implementing the standard copyrighted material requirements. c. Public Access to Copyrighted Material NSF s policy on public access to copyrighted material Public Access Policy reflects the Foundation s commitment to making certain that, to the extent possible, the American public, industry and the scientific community have access to the results of Federally funded scientific research. Pursuant to this policy, recipients must ensure that articles in peer reviewed scholarly journals and papers in juried conference proceedings are deposited in a public access compliant repository as identified in the Public Access Policy are available for download, reading, and analysis within 12 months of publication possess a minimum set of machine readable metadata elements as described in the Public Access Policy and are reported in annual and final reports with a persistent identifier. Either the final printed version or the final peer reviewed manuscript is acceptable for deposit. NSF s Public Access Policy applies to awards, funded in whole or in part, as a result of proposals submitted, or due, on or after January 25, 2016. Each NSF award contains as part of the award general terms and conditions, an article implementing the public access requirements.  Proposal Award Policies Procedures Guide XI 17 NSF 23 1 3. Special Patent and Copyright Situations a. Special Award Provisions At the request of the prospective recipient or on recommendation from NSF staff, the cognizant NSF Grants and Agreements Officer, with the concurrence of the cognizant NSF Program Officer, may negotiate special patent or copyright provisions when the Grants and Agreements Officer determines that exceptional circumstances require restriction or elimination of the right of a prospective recipient to control principal rights to subject inventions or writings in order to better achieve the objectives of the program, the National Science Foundation Act, or in the case of inventions Chapter 18 of Title 35 of the USC. Every special copyright or patent provision will allow the recipient, after an invention has been made or copyrighted material created, to request that it be allowed to retain principal rights to that invention or material, unless doing so would be inconsistent with an obligation imposed on NSF by statute, international agreement, or pact with other participants in, or supporters of, the research. b. Awards Not Primarily for Research i Awards not primarily intended to support scientific or engineering research generally do not contain patent or copyrighted material provisions. Examples of such awards are travel, conference, and equipment grants. ii NSF Fellowships and Traineeships. In accordance with Section 212 of Title 35 of the USC, NSF claims no rights to inventions made by fellows or trainees. The following provision will be included in each fellowship or traineeship program solicitation and made part of the award INTELLECTUAL PROPERTY RIGHTS The National Science Foundation claims no rights to any inventions or writings that might result from its fellowship or traineeship grants. However, fellows and trainees should be aware that the NSF, another Federal agency, or some private party may acquire such rights through other support for particular research. Also, fellows and trainees should note their obligation to include an Acknowledgment and Disclaimer in any publication. END OF PROVISION c. Awards Affected by International Agreements i Many of the bilateral and multilateral treaties and agreements underlying NSF s international cooperative research programs contain provisions on allocation of rights to inventions or writings. These sometimes require an allocation of rights different from that provided by the standard Copyrighted Material or Patent Rights articles. In those cases, the standard articles will be modified through the addition of the following to the award This project is supported under the cooperative program listed below. Your rights in inventions, writings, and data may be affected. The applicable agreement or treaty will be identified immediately beneath that sentence. ii After an invention is disclosed to the NSF Patent Assistant, the recipient of a award subject to an international agreement will be informed as to what rights, if any, it must transfer to foreign participants. Recipients also may ask the NSF Program Officer for copies of the identified international agreement before or after accepting an award.  Proposal Award Policies Procedures Guide XI 18 NSF 23 1 4. Dissemination and Sharing of Research Results a. Investigators are expected to promptly prepare and submit for publication, with authorship that accurately reflects the contributions of those involved, all significant findings from work conducted under NSF awards. Recipients are expected to permit and encourage such publication by those actually performing that work, unless a recipient intends to publish or disseminate such findings itself. b. Investigators are expected to share with other researchers, at no more than incremental cost and within a reasonable time, the primary data, samples, physical collections, and other supporting materials created or gathered in the course of work under NSF awards. Recipients are expected to encourage and facilitate such sharing. Privileged or confidential information should be released only in a form that protects the privacy of individuals and subjects involved. Exceptions to this sharing expectation may be provided by the recipient for a particular field or discipline to safeguard the rights of individuals and subjects, the validity of results, the integrity of collections, or to accommodate the legitimate interest of investigators. A recipient or investigator also may request a particular adjustment or exception from the cognizant NSF Program Officer. c. Investigators and recipients are encouraged to share software and inventions created under the award or otherwise make them or their products widely available and usable. d. NSF normally allows recipients to retain principal legal rights to intellectual property developed under NSF awards to provide incentives for development and dissemination of inventions, software and publications that can enhance their usefulness, accessibility, and upkeep. Such incentives do not, however, reduce the responsibility that investigators and organizations have as members of the scientific and engineering community, to make results, data, and collections available to other researchers. e. NSF program management will implement these policies for dissemination and sharing of research results, in a way appropriate to field and circumstances, through the proposal review process through award negotiations and award conditions and through appropriate support and incentives for data cleanup, documentation, dissemination, storage and the like. f Each NSF award contains, as part of the award general terms and conditions, an article implementing dissemination and sharing of research results. 5. Tangible Property a. Background Some NSF awards support collection or creation of tangible property, such as insects, marine life, drilling core samples and genetically altered microorganisms. As used in this section tangible property means any personal property other than equipment see Chapter II.C.2.g. iii , and intellectual property. b. Legal Rights to Tangible Property Unless otherwise provided in the award, all legal rights to tangible property collected or created during NSF assisted research remain with the recipient or investigators as determined by the policies of the organization. As members of the scientific and engineering community, both recipients and investigators are responsible for making such tangible property appropriately available to other researchers. See also, for example, 2 CFR 200.313 and 200.314 regarding Equipment and Supplies.  Proposal Award Policies Procedures Guide XI 19 NSF 23 1 E. Publication Distribution of Award Materials 1. NSF Policy NSF advocates and encourages open scientific and engineering communication. NSF expects significant findings from research it supports to be promptly submitted for publication, with authorship that accurately reflects the contributions of those involved. Copyrighted material published in peer reviewed scholarly journals and papers included in juried conference proceedings must comply with NSF s Public Access Policy as implemented in the award general terms and conditions. 2. Costs Cost of documenting, preparing, publishing, disseminating, and sharing research findings and supporting material are allowable charges against the award. See Chapter X.A.2.c. 3. Responsibilities Unless otherwise provided in the award, preparation, content, editing, identification of authorship and submission for publication of significant research findings are the responsibility of the investigators, consistent with such policies and procedures as the recipient may prescribe. 4. Recipient Obligations a. Acknowledgement of Support. Unless otherwise provided in the award, the recipient is responsible for assuring that an acknowledgment of NSF support is made i in any publication including World Wide Web pages of any material based on or developed under this project through use of the following language This material is based upon work supported by the National Science Foundation under Award No. NSF award number . ii NSF support also must be orally acknowledged during all news media interviews, including popular media such as radio, television, and news magazines. Each NSF award contains as part of the award general terms and conditions, an article implementing the recipient obligations regarding the acknowledgement of support. b. Disclaimer. The recipient is responsible for assuring that every publication of material including World Wide Web pages based on or developed under an NSF award, except scientific articles or papers appearing in scientific, technical, or professional journals, contains the following disclaimer Any opinions, findings and conclusions or recommendations expressed in this material are those of the author s and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Science Foundation. c. Copies for NSF. The recipient is responsible for assuring that the cognizant NSF Program Officer is provided access to, either electronically or in paper form, a copy of every publication of material based on or developed under this award, clearly labeled with the award number and other appropriate identifying information, promptly after publication. d. Compliance with NSF Public Access Policy. The recipient is responsible for ensuring that copyrighted material published in peer reviewed scholarly journals, papers in juried conference  Proposal Award Policies Procedures Guide XI 20 NSF 23 1 proceedings, and datasets are accessible to the public in accordance with the award general terms and conditions. e. Recipients also should note their obligations in regard to copyrights see Chapter XI.D.2 and their responsibilities as members of the scientific and engineering community to disseminate and share research results see Chapter XI.D.4 . f. Each NSF award contains as part of the award general terms and conditions, an article implementing the recipient obligations regarding the acknowledgement of support and disclaimer. F. International Considerations 1. Travel to Foreign Countries a. Policy i Expenses for transportation, lodging, subsistence, and related items incurred by project personnel and by outside consultants employed on the project, see Chapter II.C.2.g. iv who are on travel status on business related to an NSF supported project are allowable as prescribed in the governing OMB cost principles. ii Except as provided in the governing OMB cost principles, the difference between economy airfare and a higher class airfare is unallowable. A train, bus or other surface carrier may be used in lieu of, or as a supplement to, air travel at the lowest first class rate by the transportation facility used. If such travel, however, could have been performed by air, the allowance will not normally exceed that for jet economy airfare. iii Support for the foreign travel of an investigator s dependents is allowable only under the conditions identified in Chapter X.C.5. b. Use of U.S. Flag Air Carriers i In accordance with the Fly America Act 49 USC 40118 , any air transportation to, from, between, or within a country other than the U.S. of persons or property, the expense of which will be assisted by NSF funding, must be performed by or under a code sharing arrangement with a U.S. flag air carrier if service provided by such a carrier is available see Comptroller General Decision B 240956, dated September 25, 1991 . Tickets or documentation for electronic tickets must identify the U.S. flag air carrier s designator code and flight number. ii For the purposes of this requirement, U.S. flag air carrier service is considered available even though a comparable or a different kind of service can be provided at less cost by a foreign flag air carrier b foreign flag air carrier service is preferred by, or is more convenient for, NSF or traveler or c service by a foreign flag air carrier can be paid for in excess foreign currency. iii The following rules apply unless their application would result in the first or last leg of travel from or to the U.S. being performed by a foreign flag air carrier a a U.S. flag air carrier shall be used to destination or, in the absence of direct or through service, to the farthest interchange point on a usually traveled route.  Proposal Award Policies Procedures Guide XI 21 NSF 23 1 b if a U.S. flag air carrier does not serve an origin or interchange point, a foreign flag air carrier shall be used only to the nearest interchange point on a usually traveled route to connect with a U.S. flag air carrier. c. Use of Foreign Flag Air Carriers There are certain circumstances under which use of a foreign flag air carrier is permissible. These circumstances are outlined below i Airline Open Skies Agreement A foreign flag air carrier may be used if the transportation is provided under an air transportation agreement between the U.S. and a foreign government, which the Department of Transportation has determined meets the requirements of the Fly America Act. Information on Open Skies agreements in which the U.S. has entered is available on the GSA website. Note on U.S. European Union Open Skies Agreement In 2007, the U.S. entered into an Open Skies Agreement with the European Union EU . This agreement was modified in June 2010. The current Agreement gives European Community airlines airlines of Member States the right to transport passengers and cargo on flights funded by the U.S. government, when the transportation is between 1 any two points outside the U.S. or 2 a point in the U.S. and any point outside the U.S. that the EU airline is authorized to serve under the Open Skies Agreement. In 2011, two significant changes were made to the U.S. EU Open Skies Agreement. First, EU airlines are now granted the right to transport civilian agency funded passengers who are NOT eligible to travel on GSA Airline City Pair Contract fares e.g., recipients between a point in the U.S. and a point outside the U.S. even if there is a GSA Airline City Pair Contract fare in effect between the origin and destination points. An individual, however, who is traveling on a route for which there is a City Pair Contract fare in effect, and who is eligible for such a fare e.g., Federal employee , are required to fly on a U.S. carrier, absent another applicable exception. Second, under the amended Agreement, EU airlines are now authorized to transport passengers between points in the U.S. and points outside the EU if the EU airline is authorized to serve the route under the Agreement. This includes flights that originate, arrive, or stop in the EU. Prior to this change, EU airlines were limited to flying passengers between points in the U.S. and points in the EU. ii Involuntary Rerouting Travel on a foreign flag carrier is permitted if a U.S. flag air carrier involuntarily reroutes the traveler via a foreign flag air carrier, notwithstanding the availability of alternative U.S. flag air carrier service. iii Travel To and From the U.S. on non European Community Airlines Use of a non European Community foreign flag air carrier is permissible if the airport abroad is a the traveler s origin or destination airport, and use of U.S. flag air carrier service would extend the time in a travel status by at least 24 hours more than travel by a foreign flag air carrier or b an interchange point, and use of U.S. flag air carrier service would increase the number of aircraft changes the traveler must make outside of the U.S. by two or more, would require the traveler to wait four hours or more to make connections at that point, or would extend the time in a travel status by at least six hours more than travel by a foreign flag air carrier.  Proposal Award Policies Procedures Guide XI 22 NSF 23 1 iv Travel Between Points Outside the U.S. on non European Community Airlines Use of a non European Community foreign flag air carrier is permissible if a travel by a foreign flag air carrier would eliminate two or more aircraft changes en route b travel by a U.S. flag air carrier would require a connecting time of four hours or more at an overseas interchange point or c the travel is not part of the trip to or from the U.S. and use of a U.S. flag air carrier would extend the time in a travel status by at least six hours more than travel by a foreign flag air carrier. v Short Distance Travel For all short distance travel, regardless of origin and destination, use of a foreign flag air carrier is permissible if the elapsed travel time on a scheduled flight from origin to destination airport by a foreign flag air carrier is three hours or less and service by a U.S. flag air carrier would double the travel time. 2. Charter Flights Because of the risk of catastrophic loss, NSF does not encourage the use of charter flights as a means of mass transportation for groups of scientists and engineers nor does it make arrangements for purchase of charter flight airline tickets. 3. Projects in a Foreign Country a. For awards that include activities requiring permits from appropriate Federal, State, or local government authorities, the recipient should obtain any required permits prior to undertaking the proposed activities. b. The recipient must comply with the laws and regulations of any foreign country in which research is to be conducted. Areas of potential concern include 1 requirements for advance approval to conduct research or surveys 2 special arrangements for the participation of foreign scientists and engineers and 3 special visas for persons engaged in research or studies. NSF does not assume responsibility for recipient compliance with the laws and regulations of the country in which the work is to be conducted. c. The recipient also should assure that activities carried on outside the U.S. are coordinated as necessary with appropriate U.S. and foreign government authorities and that necessary licenses, permits or approvals are obtained prior to undertaking the proposed activities. 4. Passports and Visas NSF assumes no responsibility for securing passports or visas required by any person because of participation in an NSF supported project. For restrictions concerning directly charging visa costs to an NSF award, see 2 CFR 200.463. It should be noted that some countries that normally do not require visas for tourists do require special visas for scientists and engineers engaged in research or studies.  Proposal Award Policies Procedures Guide XI 23 NSF 23 1 G. Intergovernmental Review of Federal Programs The Foundation s regulation on Intergovernmental Review of National Science Foundation Programs and Activities is published in 45 CFR Part 660. H. Handling of Information 1. Questionnaires Data Collection Under NSF Awards a. Paperwork Control Under the OMB regulation, Controlling Paperwork Burdens on the Public 5 CFR 1320 , if a recipient obtains information from ten or more persons by means of identical questions, it is considered to be sponsored by NSF only if i the recipient is collecting the information at the specific request of NSF or ii the terms of the award require specific approval by NSF of the collection or its procedures. If either of these conditions is met, OMB approval of the data collection is generally required, and recipients should obtain the necessary control number from the cognizant NSF Program Officer. b. NSF Policy Data collection activities of NSF recipients are the responsibility of recipients, and NSF support of a project does not constitute NSF approval of the survey design, questionnaire content or data collection procedures. No representation may be made to respondents that such data are being collected for, or in association with, NSF or the government. However, this requirement is not intended to preclude mention of NSF support of the project in response to an inquiry or acknowledgment of such support in any publication of this data see Chapter XI.E.4 . 2. Release of Information by NSF a. Press Releases Awards for projects which appear to be of special interest to the general public may be made the subject of an NSF or joint NSF recipient press release to the news media. See Chapter X.C.2. b. Open Government Legislation i Pursuant to the Freedom of Information Act FOIA 5 USC 552 , NSF will provide agency records, with certain exceptions, if the request is in writing, includes the requester s name and means of contact, such as an email address or mailing address is clearly identified as a FOIA request, and describes the records sought with sufficient specificity to permit identification. The requester also must agree to pay fees that are chargeable under the NSF regulations. Detailed procedures are contained in 45 CFR 612. Further information is available on the NSF FOIA website. ii The Government in the Sunshine Act 5 USC 552b requires that all meetings of the NSB be open to public observation unless the subject falls within one of ten exemptions. NSF s Sunshine Act regulations are contained in 45 CFR 614. The Sunshine Act and the FOIA cited above, may require NSF to release to the public information, correspondence and documents received by NSF from recipients, unless they fall within the Acts limited exceptions.  Proposal Award Policies Procedures Guide XI 24 NSF 23 1 c. Release of Project Reports NSF expects significant findings from research it supports to be promptly submitted for publication. To the extent permitted by law, NSF will honor requests from recipients that release of Annual and Final Project Reports be delayed to permit orderly dissemination of significant findings through refereed channels. Unless such a request is received, or material is marked as proprietary, such reports may be made available to others without notice to the recipient. Information, the disclosure of which might invade personal privacy, will be redacted before release. I. Tax Status Determination of the tax status of an organization or person receiving compensation in any form as a result of an NSF award is the responsibility of the IRS, State and local tax authorities and the courts. J. Historic Properties NSF is required by the National Historic Preservation Act 54 USC 306108, et seq. NHPA , to take into account the effect of funding activities on historic properties eligible for or listed in the National Register of Historic Places. Occasionally, an NSF award may involve activities that require mitigation or other actions under the NHPA and the implementing regulations of the Advisory Council on Historic Preservation 36 CFR 800 . In such cases, as deemed appropriate by NSF, conditions meeting the requirements of the NHPA may be included in the award and the recipients may be required to coordinate with State or local historical preservation officers in implementing any required avoidance, minimization, and mitigation measures and or in meeting reporting requirements. K. Environmental Considerations Prior to making an award, NSF considers the anticipated environmental impacts associated with the activities described in the proposal. The assessment of environmental impacts is based, in part, on information provided by the organization. If, while performing the work required by the award, the recipient learns of any potential or actual unanticipated environmental impacts, the recipient shall immediately notify NSF of such impacts. The recipient shall also cease all work anticipated to cause or that is causing such unanticipated environmental impacts until NSF has had a reasonable opportunity to assess the situation, carry out any required environmental compliance activities, and provide further direction to the recipient. Other post award environmental obligations include meeting any requirements to implement mitigation measures and or meet reporting requirements identified during the environmental review process. These requirements may be the responsibility of the recipient and or NSF. L. National Security NSF awards are intended for unclassified, publicly releasable research. The recipient will not be granted access to classified information. NSF does not expect that the results of the research project will involve classified information. If, however, in conducting the activities supported under an award, the PI is concerned that any of the research results involve potentially classifiable information that may warrant Government restrictions on the dissemination of the results, the PI should promptly notify the cognizant NSF Program Officer.  Proposal Award Policies Procedures Guide XI 25 NSF 23 1 M. Scientific Integrity Scientific integrity is essential to helping ensure informed government decision making, accountability, and trust, while maintaining a vibrant scientific enterprise. Protecting scientific integrity results in better decisions, which translate into better policies that help people and communities of all backgrounds thrive.75 The National Science Foundation maintains high standards for scientific integrity, as expressly described throughout this Guide, through transparency and accountability of NSF policies and procedures, and responsible and ethical conduct of research. Additional information about scientific integrity is available on the NSF website. All organizations and personnel supported by NSF are expected to uphold the highest standards for scientific integrity. Scientific integrity builds on key principles of honesty, objectivity, ethical behavior, transparency, and professionalism in the conduct of scientific activities in an inclusive environment that is conducive to excellence in research and education. Organizations and all individuals supported by NSF awards, are reminded that the principles, expectations, and requirements that support scientific integrity are integral to multiple topics specified in the PAPPG, including Conflicts of interest PAPPG Chapter, IX.A Disclosure requirements PAPPG Chapter II.B o Biographical Sketch PAPPG Chapter II.D.2.h i o Current and Pending Support PAPPG Chapter II.D.2.h ii o Collaborators and Other Affiliations PAPPG Chapter II.D.2.h iii Human Subjects PAPPG Chapters II.E.5 and XI.B Live Vertebrate Animals PAPPG Chapters II.E.4 and XI.B.3 Non discrimination PAPPG Chapter XI NSF proposal processing and merit review PAPPG Chapters III and IV Safe and Inclusive Working Environments for Off Campus or Off Site Research PAPPG Chapter II.E.9 Potential Life Science Dual Use Research of Concern PAPPG Chapters II.E.6. and XI.B.5 Publication and Distribution of Grant Materials PAPPG Chapter XI.E Responsible and ethical conduct of research PAPPG Chapter IX.B and Research misconduct PAPPG Chapter IX.C . Reports or allegations regarding failures to adhere to Scientific Integrity principles76, such as discrimination, harassment, and research misconduct may be referred to the appropriate offices such as the Office of Equity and Civil Rights and Office of the Inspector General, as appropriate. Information about whistleblower protection is available at Reports of allegations regarding whistleblower reprisal by NSF staff and panelists may be made to Office of the Inspector General. Reports of allegations regarding whistleblower reprisal by NSF awardees and contractors also may be made to Office of the Inspector General. 75 See the White House Office of Science and Technology Policy Scientific Integrity Task Force Report. 76 See the White House Office of Science and Technology Policy Scientific Integrity Task Force Report.  Proposal Award Policies Procedures Guide XI 26 NSF 23 1 N. Miscellaneous 1. Liabilities and Losses NSF cannot assume any liability for accidents, bodily injury, illness, breach of contract, any other damages or loss, or any claims arising out of any activities undertaken pursuant to the award, whether with respect to persons or property of the recipient or third parties. The recipient is advised to insure or otherwise protect itself or others, as it may deem desirable. 2. Pre College Students and Experimental Curriculum Development Projects As required by 42 USC 1869 a and b, recipients of awards that involve pre college students in research or development, or pilot testing, evaluation, or revision of, experimental or innovative curriculum development projects will a. provide to the school board, or comparable authority responsible for the schools considering participation in the project, information concerning the need for and purposes of, the particular education project, the proposed content of the material to be used, the expected benefits to be derived and other information to assist the jurisdiction in arriving at a decision on participation b. obtain written approval for participation in the project activities after the responsible authority has carried out its procedures c. provide information and materials to the responsible school authority to assist it in carrying out its own established procedures regarding the participation of students in project activities d. provide information to NSF describing compliance with the above provisions and e. provide in every publication, testing or distribution agreement involving instructional material developed under an award including but not limited to teacher s manuals, textbooks, films, tapes or other supplementary material that such material will be made available within the school district using such material, for inspection by parents or guardians of children engaged in educational programs or projects of that school district. 3. Use of Metric Measurements The Metric Conversion Act of 1975 15 USC 205a k and E.O. 12770 3 CFR 1991 comp. encourage Federal agencies to use the Metric System in procurement, awards, and other business related activities. Each NSF award will contain as part of the award general terms and conditions, an article encouraging PIs to submit project reports, final reports, other reports, and publications produced under awards that employ the metric system of measurements.  Proposal Award Policies Procedures Guide XII 1 NSF 23 1 Chapter XII Award Administration Disputes and Misconduct A. Suspension and Termination Procedures 1. Definitions a. SUSPENSION means an action by NSF that temporarily withholds Federal support of a project pending corrective action by the recipient or a decision by NSF to terminate the award. b. TERMINATION means the ending of the NSF award, in whole or in part at any time prior to the planned end of the period of performance. 2. Suspension and Termination a. NSF Policy i An award may be suspended or terminated in whole or in part in any of the following situations a By NSF, if the recipient fails to comply with the terms and conditions of a Federal award b By NSF, to the greatest extent authorized by law, if an award no longer effectuates the program goals or agency priorities c By NSF, with the consent of the recipient, in which case the two parties must agree upon the termination conditions, including the effective date and, in the case of partial termination, the portion to be terminated d By the recipient upon sending to NSF written notification setting forth the reasons for such termination, the effective date, and, in the case of partial termination, the portion to be terminated. However, if NSF determines in the case of partial termination that the reduced or modified portion of the NSF award will not accomplish the purposes for which the NSF award was made, NSF may terminate the Federal award in its entirety e By NSF, pursuant to termination provisions included in the NSF award or f By NSF, when ordered by the Deputy Director under NSF s Regulation on Research Misconduct 45 CFR Part 689 . ii Normally, action by NSF to suspend or terminate an award will be taken only after the recipient has been informed by NSF of the proposed action, or informed of any deficiency on its part and given an opportunity to correct it. NSF, however, may immediately suspend or terminate an award without notice when it believes such action is reasonable to protect the interests of the government. iii No costs incurred during a suspension period or after the effective date of a termination will be allowable, except those costs which, in the opinion of NSF, the recipient could not reasonably avoid or eliminate, or which were otherwise authorized by the suspension or termination notice, provided such costs would otherwise be allowable under the terms of the award and the governing cost principles. iv Within 30 days of the termination date the recipient will furnish a summary of progress under the award and an itemized accounting of costs incurred prior to the termination date or pursuant to iii above. Final allowable costs under a termination settlement shall be in accordance with the terms of the award, including this section, and the governing cost principles, giving due consideration to the progress under the award. In no event will the total of NSF payments under a terminated award exceed the award amount or the NSF pro rata share when cost sharing was anticipated, whichever is less.  Proposal Award Policies Procedures Guide XII 2 NSF 23 1 v A notice of termination other than by mutual agreement and or the final settlement amount may be subject to review pursuant to Chapter XII.B. vi NSF will report award terminations to the OMB designated integrity and performance system in accordance with Federal regulation, but only after the recipient has had an opportunity to exhaust the review procedures contained in Chapter XII.B. b. Procedures for Suspension or Termination by NSF i When it is believed that a recipient has failed to comply with one or more of the terms and conditions of an award, the NSF Grants and Agreements Officer will normally advise the recipient in writing of the nature of the problem and that failure to correct the deficiency may result in suspension or termination of the award. The recipient will be requested to respond in writing within 30 calendar days of the date of such letter, describing the action taken or the plan designed to correct the deficiency. Copies of such correspondence will be furnished to the PI and to the cognizant NSF Program Officer. NSF, however, may immediately suspend or terminate a award without notice when it believes such action is reasonable to protect the interests of the government. ii If a satisfactory response is not received within the above period, the NSF Grants and Agreements Officer may issue a notice immediately suspending authority to further obligate award funds, in whole or in part. Notice of suspension is sent to the AOR, with a copy to the PI. Within NSF, copies are furnished to the NSF Division of Financial Management and to the cognizant NSF Program Officer. The notice will set forth the terms of the suspension and its effective date. iii Normally, the suspension will remain in effect for a maximum of 60 days to allow the recipient to take corrective action. In the event that the deficiency is not corrected to the satisfaction of NSF, the NSF Grants and Agreements Officer may issue a notice of termination. The notice will set forth the reasons for the action and its effective date. iv The remedies described in Chapter XII.B do not preclude a recipient from being subject to debarment and suspension under the OMB Guidelines to Agencies on Government wide Debarment and Suspension Nonprocurement published at 2 CFR 180 and NSF s Implementation of the OMB Guidelines, located at 2 CFR Chapter XXV. v Suspension or termination due to research misconduct will be imposed as provided in that regulation. 3. Termination by Mutual Agreement a. NSF Policy Circumstances may arise in which either NSF or the recipient wishes to terminate a project. If both parties agree that continuation of the project would not produce results commensurate with the further expenditure of funds, or if there arises any other reason, the award may be terminated by mutual agreement. b. Procedures i If the recipient wishes to terminate the project, the AOR should advise the NSF Grants and Agreements Officer in writing and send a copy to the cognizant NSF Program Officer. ii If NSF wishes to terminate the project, the NSF Grants and Agreements Officer will advise the recipient s AOR in writing and send copies to the PI and the cognizant NSF Program Officer. iii Within 30 days after receipt of request from either party for termination by mutual agreement, the other party will provide an appropriate written response. In the event of disagreement between the parties,  Proposal Award Policies Procedures Guide XII 3 NSF 23 1 the NSF Grants and Agreements Officer will make a final decision, subject to the review procedures prescribed by Chapter XII.B. iv Following termination, award closeout procedures will be initiated. 4. NSF Suspension or Termination Review Procedure Recipients should refer to Chapter XII.B.3 for procedures to request review of a suspension or termination notice. Pending resolution of the request for review, a notice of termination shall remain in effect. B. Informal Resolution of Award Administration Disputes 1. Background Consistent with the Recommendation on Grant Disputes by the Administrative Conference of the U.S., and with the intent of the provisions of Alternative Dispute Resolution, the Foundation provides the informal resolution processes described below concerning disputes or disagreements that may arise over Grants and Agreements Officer post award decisions under an NSF award. 2. Scope of Post Award Disputes Covered The disputes below are covered under the process described in Chapter XII.B.3 a. cost disallowances pursuant to a Grants and Agreements Officer s decision e.g., specific disallowances under an individual award or as a result of an audit report b. termination orders and c. the final settlement amount under a termination. 3. Procedures a. The recipient should submit a letter addressed to both the Division Director, Division of Grants and Agreements DGA and the Division Director, Division of Acquisition and Cooperative Support DACS , National Science Foundation, 2415 Eisenhower Avenue, Alexandria, VA 22314. This letter must specify the recipient s disagreement or dispute and identify the NSF Grants and Agreements Officer s decision in question, giving reasons for the request for review and providing any other material pertinent to the request. NSF will determine the appropriate Division to respond to the dispute. b. The letter to the Division Directors, DGA and DACS, must be either postmarked or stamped received by NSF no later than 30 days after the date of the NSF letter notifying the recipient of the decision in question. The time for filing a request for review is strictly enforced and no extensions will be granted. c. The request for review need not follow a prescribed format however, it must contain a full statement of the recipient s position with respect to the disputed matter and the facts and rationale that support the recipient s position. Dispute requests will be reviewed if the recipient submits new information which was unavailable at the time of the original decision identifies an error in fact or application of NSF policy in the original decision or improper procedures were followed in the original decision.  Proposal Award Policies Procedures Guide XII 4 NSF 23 1 d. The Division Director, DGA or DACS, will review or designate one or more individuals to review the matter. One reviewing official will be at least at a management level equivalent to the official who made the decision that is being reviewed. In no case, will the review be conducted by any individual involved with the original decision or involved in recommending and or monitoring the programmatic aspects of the project, or responsible for negotiating and or administering its business or financial aspects. e. The designated individual s will review and consider all relevant information available. A report which identifies the conclusion and recommendation will be completed, and in disputes covered under i Chapter XII.B.2.a and Chapter XII.B.2.b, the report will be completed within 30 days and forwarded to the Director, DGA or DACS or their designee for a final and unappealable written decision for the agency. The Director, DGA or DACS or their designee will communicate the decision in writing to the recipient, normally within 15 days of receipt of the report, unless otherwise specified by NSF. ii Chapter XII.B.2.c, the report will be completed within 90 days and forwarded to the NSF Deputy Director or designee. The NSF Deputy Director or designee will make the final and unappealable decision for the agency and will communicate the decision in writing to the recipient within 15 days of receipt of the report unless otherwise specified by NSF. C. Research Misconduct RESEARCH MISCONDUCT means fabrication, falsification, or plagiarism in proposing or performing research funded by NSF, reviewing research proposals submitted to NSF, or in reporting research results funded by NSF. 1. NSF Policies and Responsibilities a. NSF will take appropriate action against individuals or organizations upon a determination that misconduct has occurred. It may also take interim action during an investigation. Possible actions include sending a letter of reprimand to the individual or organization, requiring prior NSF approval of particular activities by an individual or organization, requiring special assurances of compliance with particular policies, restricting designated activities or expenditures under particular awards, suspending or terminating awards, debarring or suspending an individual or organization and prohibiting participation by an individual as an NSF reviewer, advisor or consultant. b. NSF will find misconduct only after careful inquiry and investigation by a recipient, by another Federal agency or by NSF. An inquiry consists of preliminary information gathering and preliminary fact finding to determine whether an allegation or apparent instance of misconduct has substance. An investigation must be undertaken if the inquiry determines the allegation or apparent instance of misconduct has substance. An investigation is a formal development, examination, and evaluation of a factual record to determine whether misconduct has taken place or, if misconduct has already been confirmed, to assess its extent and consequences or determine appropriate action. c. Before NSF makes any final finding of misconduct or takes any final action on such a finding, NSF will normally afford the accused individual or organization notice, a chance to provide comments and rebuttal and a chance to appeal. In structuring procedures in individual cases, NSF may take into account procedures already followed by other entities investigating or adjudicating the same allegation of misconduct. d. Debarment or suspension for misconduct will be imposed only after further procedures described in applicable debarment and suspension regulations 2 CFR 180 and 2 CFR Chapter XXV . e. The OIG oversees investigations of research misconduct and conducts any NSF inquiries and investigations into suspected or alleged research misconduct.  Proposal Award Policies Procedures Guide XII 5 NSF 23 1 f. The Deputy Director adjudicates research misconduct proceedings, and the Director decides appeals. g. After receiving an investigation report, the subject s rebuttal and recommendations of the OIG, the NSF Deputy Director may initiate further investigation or hearings or order interim or final actions. A written disposition specifying actions to be taken will be sent to affected individuals or organizations and will include instructions on how to pursue an appeal to the Director of the Foundation. 2. Role of Recipients a. Recipients bear primary responsibility for prevention and detection of misconduct. In most instances, NSF will rely on recipients to promptly i initiate an inquiry into any suspected or alleged misconduct ii conduct a subsequent investigation, if the inquiry finds substance iii take action necessary to ensure the integrity of research, the rights and interests of research subjects and the public and the observance of legal requirements or responsibilities and iv provide appropriate safeguards for subjects of allegations as well as informants. b. If a recipient wishes NSF to defer independent inquiry or investigation, it should i inform NSF immediately if an initial inquiry finds substance ii keep NSF informed during such an investigation iii notify NSF even before deciding to initiate an investigation or as required during an investigation a if there is reasonable indication of possible violations of civil or criminal law b if public health or safety is at risk c if NSF s resources, reputation, or other interests need protecting d if Federal action may be needed to protect the interests of a subject of the investigation or of others potentially affected e if the research community or the public should be informed or f if research activities should be suspended. iv provide NSF with the final report from any investigation. c. If a recipient wishes NSF to defer independent inquiry or investigation, it should complete any inquiry and decide whether an investigation is warranted within 90 days. It should similarly complete any investigation and reach a disposition within 180 days. If completion of an inquiry or investigation is delayed, but the recipient wishes NSF deferral to continue, NSF may require submission of periodic status reports. d. Recipients should maintain and effectively communicate to their staff appropriate policies and procedures relating to misconduct, which should indicate when NSF must or should be notified. e. Online research ethics training is available through the Department of Health and Human Services, Office of Research Integrity.  Proposal Award Policies Procedures Guide XII 6 NSF 23 1 3. Reporting Possible Misconduct Possible misconduct in activities funded by NSF should be reported to the Office of Inspector General, National Science Foundation through use of one of the following methods Website preferred Anonymous Phone 800 428 2189 US Mail 2415 Eisenhower Ave Alexandria, VA 22314 Attn OIG Hotline   Subject Index Proposal Award Policies Procedures Guide NSF 23 1 PAPPG SECTION A Absence Disengagement of Principal Investigator or co PI VII.B.2 Acceptance of Assistance Agreements VI.A Accomplishment Based Renewal II.D.2.d vi , V.B Acknowledgment and Disclaimer XI.D.3.b, XI.E.4 Acquisition Cost of Equipment II.D.2.g iii Additional Funding Support VI.E Addition of co PI VII.B.2.c Administrative and Clerical Salaries and Wages II.D.2.f i b , X.B.2 Advance Payments VIII.C, VIII.D Advanced Visualization Resources II.E.7 Advisor II.D.2.h iii , II.F.8, Exhibit II 2 Age Discrimination XI.A.5 Alcoholic Beverages II.D.2.f xiii c Allowability of Costs II.D.2.f, Chapter X Animal Welfare II.D.2.i ix , II.E.4, XI.B.3 Annual Project Report VI.E.3, VII.B.2.f, VII.B.5, VII.D.1, XI.D.2.c, XI.H.2.c Antarctic Proposals I.E.2, II.D.2.i vi Anthropogenic Events I.F, II.F.2 Anti discrimination Statutes XI.A Appeal Process for Proposals Declined for Financial or Administrative Reasons III.F.2 Appeals III.F.2, Chapter XII Appendices II.D.2.k Applicable Credits VIII.D.4, VIII.D.5 Appointments II.D.2.h Approvals, Requests for NSF. X.A.3 Audits VII.E Authorized Organizational Representative AOR I.D.3, I.G.1, II.D.1.d, III.C, III.D, IV.A, VII.A.2, Exhibit II 1 Award Abstract III.E Award Budget II.D.2.f, VI.B.1.c Changes VII.B Closeout VII.D.5 Conditions, General and Standard VI.C Disputes Resolution XII.B Financial Disclosure II.D.1.d, Exhibit II 2, IX.A Financial Reporting VIII.E International Travel II.D.2.g iv c , XI.F Instrument, Defined VI.B Opportunities for Academic Liaison with Industry GOALI II.D.2, II.F.5 Periods VI.D Renewal II.C.2.a, II.C.2.d vi , Exhibit II 1, Chapter V, VI.E.2 Suspension XII.A Termination XII.A Transfer VII.B.3  Proposal Award Policies Procedures Guide NSF 23 1 Award Cash Management Service Chapter VIII Award Conditions VI.C Award Instrument VI.B Award Recommendations III.E, Exhibit III 1 Awardee Definition VIII.B.6 Organization II.D.2.a, VIII.B.6 Prior Approvals Chapter VII Share see Cost Sharing Standards Chapter IX B Bayh Dole Act XI.D.1 Beginning Investigator II.E.2 Biographical Sketch es II.D.2.h, Exhibit II 1 Biological Sciences Directorate Duplicate Proposal Policy II.E.2 Bonding and Insurance XI.C.2 Broad Agency Announcement BAA I.C.4 Broad Agency Announcement Management System BAAM I.A Broader Impacts II.D, II.F, Exhibit II 1, III.A Budget II.C.2.g Budget Changes VII.B.3, VII.C Build America, Buy America, and Made in America Statutes X.C.1 Business Officer VIII.B.2 Buy America, Build America, and Made in America Statutes X.C.1 C Career Life Balance CLB Supplemental Funding Requests II.F.8 Cash Advances VIII.C, VIII.D Contributions VIII.D Refunds VIII.D Reports VIII.E Center Proposal II.F.12 Certifications I.G.2, II.D.1, II.D.1.d Authorized Organizational Representative II.D.1.d Conflict of Interest II.D.1.d, Exhibit II 2 Flood Hazard Insurance II.D.1.d Organizational Support II.D.1.d Responsible and Ethical Conduct of Research . .II.D.1.d Safe and Inclusive Working Environments for Off Campus or Off Site Research II.D.1.d viii , II.D.2.a, II.E.9, XI.M Changes Grant Budget VI.B.1.c, Exhibit II 1, VII.B.3, VII.C Grant Periods VI.D Grantee Notifications to and Requests for Approval from the National Science Foundation Chapter VII   Project Direction or Management VII.B Objectives, Scope, or Methods Procedures. VII.B.1 Principal Investigator VII.B.2 Charter Flights XI.F.2 Civil Rights Act of 1964 XI.A.2 Classified Research XI.L Clerical Administrative Clerical Salaries Wages II.D.2.f i b , X.B Closeout VII.D.5, VIII.E Closure of NSF I.F Co Editors II.D.1.e, II.D.2.h iii Coffee Breaks and Meals II.D.2.f xiii b , II.D.2.f v , II.F.9 Collaborative Arrangements II.D.2.i Collaborative Proposals II.D.2.i, II.E.3, IV.A Submission of a collaborative proposal from one organization II.E.3.a Submission of a collaborative proposal from multiple organizations II.E.3.b Collaborators II.D.1.e, II.E.3.b Collaborators and Other Affiliations Information II.D.2.h Colleges I.E.1 Common Rule for the Protection of Human Subjects II.E.5 Compensation for Personal Services X.B.1 Compliance, Environmental II.D.2.i, XI.K Computer Services II.D.2.f vi Computing Devices II.D.2.f vi a Concept Outlines I.D.1 Conduct Responsible and Ethical Conduct of Research II.D.1.d, IX.B, XI.M Conferences I.B, II.D.2.f iv , II.D.2.f v , II.D.2.f xiii , II.E.8, II.F.9 Confidential Budgetary Information II.D.2.f i d Conflict of Interest Policies IX.A Conflicting Guidelines X.A.1 Conflicts of Interest COIs I.D.1, II.D.1.d, II.D.1.e Potentially Disqualifying COIs Exhibit II 2 Construction, Rearrangements and Reconversions Exhibit II 1, X.C.1, XI.C Consultant Services II.D.2.f vi , X.B.2 Contents, Proposal II.D.2 Continuing Grant VI.E.3 Contracts under Grants Subawards II.D.2.f vi e , VII.B.4 Cooperative Agreements Chapter VI Copies of Reviews III.G, IV.A, IV.C, IV.D.3 Copyright XI.D.2 Copyrightable Material XI.D.2 Cost Principles II.D.2.f, Chapter X Cost Sharing II.D.2.f xii , III.D, VII.C Costs, Visa XI.F.4 Cover Sheet II.D.2, Exhibit II 1 Creativity Two Year Extensions VI.D.3.d Credits VIII.D Current and Pending Support II.D.2.h, Exhibit II 1 Curriculum Development Projects XI.N.2 Proposal Award Policies Procedures Guide NSF 23 1   D Data Collection XI.H.1 Data Infrastructure II.E.7 Data Management Plan II.D.2.d ii Data Rights XI.D Data Storage II.E.7 Davis Bacon Act XI.C.1 Deadline Dates I.F.2 Dear Colleague Letters I.C.5 Debarment and Suspension. XII.A.2.b, XII.C.1.d Declination of Proposal III.F, IV.C, IV.D Decline for Financial or Administrative Reasons III.F Definitions of Categories of Personnel Exhibit II 3 Delays VII.B.1.c Dependent Care Travel Costs II.D.2.f iv a , X.C.3 Deviation Authorization I.F, II.A, II.D.2.d, Exhibit II 1 Direct Costs II.D.2.f, X.B, X.C Disability Regulations XI.A Disbursements VIII.B.4, VIII.E Disclaimer. XI.E.4.b Disclosure Requirements II.B Discrimination XI.A Disengagement VII.B.2 Disputes Resolution XII.B Dissemination Costs II.D.2.f vi b Dissemination of Research Results II.D.2.d ii , , XI.D.4, XI.E, XI.H.2.c Distribution of Grant Materials. XI.E DNA Guidelines XI.B.2 Documentation Costs II.D.2.f vi b , X.A.2.c, XI.E.2 Domestic Travel II.D.2.f iv b , X.C.3 Dual Use Research of Concern II.D.2.a, II.E.6, XI.B.5 Duration Information II.D.2.a Proposal Award Policies Procedures Guide NSF 23 1 E EArly concept Grants for Exploratory Research EAGER II.F.3 Education Amendments of 1972 Title IX XI.A Effective Date see Start Date Encourage Discourage Decisions I.D.3.b, IV.D.2.a End Date VI.D.1.b, VI.D.3.b Endangered Species II.D.2.i Entertainment Costs II.D.2.f xiii a , II.EF.9 Environmental Compliance II.D.2i, XI.K Environmental Impact II.D.2.i, XI.K Equal Employment Opportunity XI.A.6 Equipment Acquisition IX.E Allowability of Costs II.D.2.f iii , VII.B.2.e, IX.E.2, X.A.2.c Conditions for Acquisition and Use IX.E.2   Definition II.D.2.f iii For profit Organizations IX.E.1 General Purpose II.D.2.fg iii , II.D.2.f vi d , IX.E.2.b Government Owned IX.E.2.g, IX.E.4, IX.E.5 Non profit Organizations IX.E.1 Prohibited Telecommunications and Video Surveillance Services or Equipment II.D.2.f xiii e , X.F Proposals II.F.10 Rental or Lease X.C.3 Shared Use IX.E.2.d Special Purpose II.D.2.f iii , II.F.10 Title IX.E.1, IX.E.2.g, IX.E.4 Transfer VII.B.2.e, IX.E.2.g Erroneous Payments VIII.D.2 Ethical Responsible and Ethical Conduct of Research II.D.1.d, IX.B, XI.M Events Natural or Anthropogenic I.F.2, II.F.2 Excess Government Personal Property IX.E.5 Executive Order 12372, Intergovernmental Review of Federal Programs II.C.2.j, XI.G 12770, Metric Usage in Federal Government Programs I.D.3, XI.M.3 Expendable Personal Property see Materials and Supplies Expenditures Allowability of Costs II.C.2.g, Chapter X Grantee Responsibility VII.A.1 Reports VIII.E Outlays VIII.B.4 Experimental Curriculum XI.M.2 Expiration Date see End Date Extension for Special Creativity VI.D.3.d Extension of Grant Period VI.D.3.c Proposal Award Policies Procedures Guide NSF 23 1 F acilitation Award for Scientists and Engineers with Disabilities FASED II.D.2, II.D.2.i, II.F.7 acilities and Administrative Costs F A II.D.2.f v , II.D.2.f vi , II.D.2.f viii , II.D.2.f ix , III.D, X.D acilities, Equipment and Other Resources II.D.2.g, Exhibit II 1 aculty Associate, Definition Exhibit II 3 astLane System I.A ederal Acquisition Regulation II.D.2.f X.A ederal Agencies I.E.7, I.H, II.D.2 ederal Awardee Performance and Integrity Information System FAPIIS III.F, XII.A.2.a vi ederal Cost Principles now consolidated in 2 CFR 200, Subpart E II.D.2.f, Chapter X ederal Emergency Management Agency II.D.1.d iii ederal Financial Reports VIII ederally Funded Research and Development Centers FFRDCs I.E.2 ederal Wide Assurance FWA II.E.5 ee Payments II.D.2.f x , X.E ellowships II.D.2, II.F.8, IV.D.2, VII.D.1, VII.D.2, XI.B.3.b iv , XI.D.3.b ii inal Disbursement Reporting. VIII.E inal Project Report VII.D.2, XI.H.2.c  Final Technical Information Items VII.D Financial Disclosure II.D.1.d, Exhibit II 2, IX.A Financial Management System Standards VIII.A, IX.D Fiscal Reports VIII.E Fixed Amount Award VI.D Flood Hazard Insurance II.D.1.d iii Fonts II.C.2, Exhibit II 1 Foreign Organizations I.E.2, II.D.2.a, II.D.2.c, II.D.2.f, II.E.3, II.E.8, XI.B.3.b iv , Exhibit II 1 Foreign Travel II.D.2.f iv c , XI.F Foreign Flag Air Carriers XI.F For profit Organizations I.E.2, IX.E.1 Freedom of Information Act. XI.H.2.b Fringe Benefits II.D.2.f ii , III.D, X.B.1.b Full Proposal I.D, II.D.2, IV.B Funding Opportunities I.A, I.B, I.C Funding Recommendations Chapter III, Exhibit III 1 Funds Allowability of Costs Expenditures II.D.2.f, Chapter X Payment of VIII.C Residual VI.E.2 Safeguarding VIII.C.2 Transfer of VII.B Withholding VIII.C.2 G General Purpose Equipment II.D.2.f iii , IX.E.2.b Government Owned Equipment IX.E Graduate Advisors II.D.2.h, Exhibit II 2 Graduate Students I.E, II.C.2.g i c , Exhibit II 3, Chapter V Grants and Agreements, Division of I.H, III.F Grants.gov I.A, I.G.1, II.A, II.B, II.C.2, IV.B, IV.D.2 Group Proposals II.D.2.f v H Harassment Sexual Harassment, Other forms of Harassment, or Sexual Assault II.D.2.i xi , II.F.9, II.F.11, VII.A.2, XI.A.1, XI.M Hazardous Materials II.D.2.i ix High Performance Computing Resources II.E.7 Higher Education, Institutions of I.E.1 Historic Places II.D.2.i, XI.J Home Office Workspace II.D.2.f xiii d Human Subjects II.D.2.a, II.D.2.f v , II.D.2.f vi , II.D.2.i, II.E.5, II.D.2.i ix , XI.B.1 I Ideas Lab. II.F.6 Inclusive, Safe and Inclusive Working Environments for Off Campus or Off Site Research II.D.1.d viii , II.D.2.a, II.E.9, XI.M Income VIII.D.4, XI.D.2.a Proposal Award Policies Procedures Guide NSF 23 1   Indirect Costs II.D.2.f v , II.D.2.f viii , II.D.2.f ix , III.D, X.D Informal Resolution of Grant Administration Disputes XII.B Information Release XI.H.2 In Kind Contributions II.D.2.f xii , VII.C.2 Inspector General, Office of XII.C Institutional Animal Care and Use Committee II.E.4, XI.B.3 Institutional Review Board II.E.5, XI.B.1 Institutions of Higher Education I.E.1 Instrumentation and Facilities Guidelines IX.E.3 Insurance. II.D.1.d iii , XI.C.2 Intangible Property XI.D Intellectual Merit II.D.1.d, II.D.2.b, II.D.2.d, Exhibit II 1, III.A, III.B Intellectual Property XI.D Interest VIII.D.3 Intergovernmental Review of Federal Programs II.D.2.i, XI.G International Activities I.E.6, II.E.8, XI.F Agreements XI.F.3 Charter Flights XI.F.2 Copyright XI.D.2.a, XI.D.3 Patents XI.D.1.b, XI.D.3 Projects see Foreign Projects Travel II.D.2.f iv c , XI.F Travel Grants IV.D.2.b Travel Proposals II.F.11 Intra University Consulting X.B.3 Inventions and Patents XI.D.1 Investigator Financial Disclosure II.D.1.d, Exhibit II 2, IX.A Invite Not Invite Decisions I.D.3.a Proposal Award Policies Procedures Guide NSF 23 1 L Large Facilities Projects see Major Facilities Projects Leased Facilities and Equipment X.C.3 Leave, Sabbatical VII.B.2.a Letters of Collaboration .II.D.2.i iv Letters of Intent I.D.2 Letters of Support . II.D.2.i Liabilities and Losses XI.N.1 License Rights XI.D.1 Limited English Proficiency LEP XI.A.7 List of Suggested Reviewers or Reviewers Not to Include II.D.1.b, Exhibit II 1 Living Organisms XI.B Local Governments I.E.2 Long Term Disengagement of PI VII.B.2.a M Made in America, Build America, Buy America Statutes X.C.1 Major Facilities Projects II.E.11 Major Research Facilities II.E.13   March in Rights XI.D.1.l Margin and Spacing Requirements II.C.2, Exhibit II 1 Materials and Supplies II.D.2.f vi a , IX.E Maximum Obligation of NSF X.A.2.a Meals and Coffee Breaks II.D.2.f xiii b Meetings and Conferences II.D.2.f iv , II.D.2.f v , II.E.8, II.F.9, X.C.3 Mentoring II.D.2.ij, II.E.3, Exhibit II 1 Merit Review Criteria I.C, I.D.4, II.D.2, II.F Chapter III Merit Review Principles Chapter III.A Methods Procedures, Changes in VII.B.1.b Metric Conversion Act of 1975 I.D.4, XI.N.3 Minority Owned Business II.D.2.a Misconduct in Science I.D.3, XII.C Proposal Award Policies Procedures Guide NSF 23 1 N National Center for Atmospheric Research II.E.7 National Environmental Policy Act of 1969 II.D.2.i, XI.K National Flood Insurance Act II.D.1.d National Register of Historic Places II.D.2.i, XI.J National Science Board I.C, II.D.2.f xii , III.A, III.B, IV.D.1, Chapter V, XI.D.1, XI.H.2 National Science Foundation Act XI.C.2, XI.D.1 Approvals Chapter VII National Security XI.L Natural Events I.F, II.F.2 New Awardee Chapter VI News Release X.C.2, XI.H.2 No Cost Extension VI.D.3.c Non academic Organization. I.E, II.D.2.f i a , Chapter V Non award Decisions and Transactions Chapter IV Non Discrimination Statutes and Regulations XI.A Non profit Organization I.E, VII.E, IX.D.1.a, XI.E Notifications to NSF Chapter VII NSF ID I.G.3 NSF Prospective New Awardee Guide Chapter II NSF Update I.B NSF Use Only II.D.1 Objectives, Changes in VII.B.1.a Obligations VIII.B.7 Off Campus Off Site Activities II.D.1.d viii , II.D.2.a, II.E.9, XI.M Office of Inspector General NSF XII.C Open Government Legislation XI.H.2.b Other Direct Costs II.D.2.f vi , X.B Other Personnel II.D.2.h i , Exhibit II 3 Other Professional, Definition Exhibit II 3 Outlays VIII.B.4   Overhead. see Indirect Costs P Page Formatting Instructions II.C.3 Page Limitations II.DExhibit II 1, III.D, IV.B, IV.D.2, V.A, V.B Pagination Instructions II.C.1 Participant Support II.D.2.f v , II.F.9 Passports and Visas XI.F.4 Patent Rights Clause XI.D.1.c Patents and Inventions XI.D.1 Payments Chapter VIII Permits XI.B.4, XI.F.3 Person Months II.D.2.f i c , II.D.2.h ii , VII.B.2 Personnel, Definitions Exhibit II 3 PI co PI Addition of co PI VII.B.2.c Change in Person Months VII.B.2 Compensation II.C.2.g i , X.B.1.a Definition Exhibit II 3 Information about PI and co PIs II.C.2.a.4 d Long Term Disengagement VII.B.2.a Substitute Change VII.B.2.e Transfer to Another Institution VII.B.2.f Withdrawal VII.B.2.d Place of Performance II.D.2.a Planning Proposals II.F.1 Postdoctoral Associate .II.D.2.f i , II.D.2.h ii Postdoctoral Scholar II.F.5, Exhibit II 3 Post End Costs X.A.2.c Potentially Disqualifying Conflicts of Interest Exhibit II 2 Pre Award Costs X.A.2.b Pre Award Financial and Administrative Reviews III.F.1 Pre College Students XI.N.2 Preliminary Proposals I.D.3 Preservation of Historic Places II.D.2.i, XI.J Press Releases X.C.2, XI.H.2.a Principal Investigator PI , Definition Exhibit II 3 Principles, Federal Cost now consolidated in 2 CFR 200, Subpart E II.D.2.f, Chapter X Prior NSF Approval Chapter VII, X.A.3 Privileged Information III.H, XI.D.4 Procurement Standards IX.F Products II.D.2.h Professional Preparation II.D.2.h Professional Service Costs II.D.2.f vi c Program Announcements I.C.2 Program Descriptions I.C.1 Program Income VIII.D.4 Program Solicitations I.C.3 Project Descriptions II.D.2.d, Exhibit II 1 Proposal Award Policies Procedures Guide NSF 23 1   Project Performance VII.A Project Performance Site Primary Location II.D.2.a Project Reports VII.D Project Summary II.D.2.b, Exhibit II 1 Property Acquisition IX.E.2 Copyright and Publication XI.D.2, XI.E Data and Software XI.D.4 Equipment II.D.2.f iii , IX.E.1, X.F Excess Government Personal Property IX.E Intellectual XI.D Inventions and Patents XI.D.1 Management Standards IX.E Materials and Supplies II.D.2.f vi a , IX.E Protection of Historic Places II.D.2.i, XI.J Title IX.E, XI.D Proposal Certifications I.G.2, II.D.1, II.D.1.d, II.D.1.e, Exhibit II 1 Conference II.F.9 Contents II.D.2 Cover Sheet II.D.2.a, Exhibit II 1 Declination of Proposals for Financial or Administrative Reasons III.F Declinations III.E., III.F, Chapter IV Deviations I.F, II.A, II.D, Exhibit II 1 File Updates III.C, IV.A Format II.C International Travel II.D.2.f iv c , II.D.2.i, II.F.11 Margin and Spacing Requirements II.C, Exhibit II 1 Not Accepted IV.B Page Formatting II.C Pagination Instructions II.C Preparation Checklist Exhibit II 1 Processing I.H Proposal Award Process Timeline Exhibit III 1 Receipt I.G.4 Reconsideration IV.D Renewed Support II.D.2.d vi , II.F.1, II.F.2, II.F.6, Chapter V Return without Review II.A, Exhibit II 1, Exhibit III 1, IV.B, IV.D, IV.E Revisions Made During the Review Process III.D Sections II.D.2 Status I.G.4 Submission Chapter I, Chapter II, Exhibit II 1, IV.A, IV.E, Chapter V Symposia see Conference Types II.F Withdrawal Chapter IV.A Proprietary Information II.D.1.c, II.D.2.f i d , II.E.1, III.H, XI.H.2.c Prospective New Awardee Guide Chapter II Provisional Rate X.D.1 Public Access Policy XI.D.2.c, XI.E.1, XI.E.4.d Publication s II.C.2.d iii , II.C.2.f i c , II.C.2.g vi b , XI.D.4, XI.E, XI.H.2 Proposal Award Policies Procedures Guide NSF 23 1  Proposal Award Policies Procedures Guide NSF 23 1 Q Questionnaires XI.H.1 R Rapid Response Research Grants RAPID II.F.2 Rearrangements and Reconversion Costs XI.C Rebudgeting II.D.2.f i , VII.B.5 Recombinant DNA XI.B.2 Recompetition Chapter V Reconsideration of Proposals IV.D Records Retention VII.E References Cited II.D.2.e, Exhibit II 1 Refunds to NSF VIII.D Rehabilitation Act of 1973 XI.A.3 Reimbursements VIII.C Release of Recipient Proposal Information III.H Release of Information XI.H.2 Renewed Support II.C.2.a.4 e , II.C.2.d vi , VI.E.2 Accomplishment Based Renewal V.B Traditional Renewal V.A Reporting Requirements VII.D, VIII.D.4, VIII.E, XII.C.3 Reports Annual Project VII.D.1, XI.H.2.c Cost Sharing VII.C.3 Final Disbursement Reporting VIII.E Final Project VII.D.2, XI.H.2.c Project Outcomes Report for the General Public VII.D.3 Technical Information Items VII.D Request for Advance or Reimbursement VIII.C Research Advanced by Interdisciplinary Science and Engineering RAISE II.F.4 Research Assistant, Definition Exhibit II 3 Research Equipment II.D.2.f iii , II.D.2.i, II.F.10, IX.D Research Experiences for Undergraduates II.D.2.i Research Infrastructure Proposal II.F.13 Research in Undergraduate Institutions II.D.2.i Research Involving Wildlife II.E.4, X.B.3 Research Misconduct I.D.3, XII.C Research Opportunity Awards II.D.2.i Residual Funds VI.E.2 Resolution of Grant Administration Disputes XII.B Responsible and Ethical Conduct of Research. II.D.1.d, IX.B, XI.M Resubmission of Proposal IV.E Results from Prior NSF Support II.D.2.d, Exhibit II 1, Chapter V Return without Review II.A, Exhibit II 1, Exhibit III 1, IV.B, IV.D, IV.E Review Criteria I.C, I.D.4, II.D.2, II.F Chapter III Reviews, Copies of III.G, IV.A, IV.C   Revisions to Proposals Made During the Review Process III.D Revocation XII.A Rights in Data and Software XI.D Royalties under Grants XI.D Proposal Award Policies Procedures Guide NSF 23 1 S Sabbatical Leave VII.B.2.a Safe, Safe and Inclusive Working Environments for Off Campus or Off Site Research II.D.1.d viii , II.D.2.a, II.E.9, XI.M Salaries and Wages II.D.2.f i , X.B Administrative and Clerical Salaries and Wages Policy II.D.2.f i b , X.B.2 Confidential Budgetary Information II.D.1.c, II.D.2.f i d , II.E.1 Policies II.D.2.f i a , II.D.2.f i b ,X.B Procedures II.D.2.f i c , X.B Scope, Change in VII.B.1.a, Security, National XI.L Seismic Safety XI.C.3 Selection of Reviewers II.D.1.b, III.B Senior Personnel II.D.2.h, Exhibit II 3 Harassment Sexual Harassment, Other forms of Harassment, or Sexual Assault II.D.2.i xi , II.F.9, II.F.11, VII.A.2, XI.A.1, XI.M Sex Discrimination I.E, XI.A.4 Shared Use of Equipment IX.D.2.d, IX.D.3 Sharing Research Results XI.D.4, XI.E Short Term Absence of PI VII.B.2 Significant Change, Delay or Event of Unusual Interest VII.B.1.c Single Copy Documents II.D.1, Exhibit II 1 Site Visits. VII.A.1.c Small Business I.E.2, II.D.2, IV.D.2.b, IX.A, IX.E.1.b Software Rights XI.D Special Creativity Two Year Extensions VI.D.3.d Special Exceptions to Deadline Date Policy I.F.2 Special Processing Instructions II.E, Exhibit II 1 Special Information II.D.2.i, Exhibit II 1 Sponsored Projects Office I.D.3, IV.A Staff Benefits see Fringe Benefits Standards Awardee Chapter IX Financial Management Systems VIII.A, IX.D Procurement IX.F Property Management IX.E Start Date VI.D.1.a State Governments I.E.2.e Students I.E, II.D.2.h, II.F.5, II.E.7, II.F.8, II.F.9, II.F.12, Exhibit II 1, Exhibit II 3, Chapter V Subawards II.D.2.f, II.D.2.f vi e , II.D.2.g, II.D.2.i, II.E.3, VII.B.4, VIII.C.2.b Submission Instructions I.G.1, Chapter II, Exhibit II 1 Windows I.F.3 Substitute Principal Investigator VII.B.2.e Sunshine Act XI.H.2.b ii   Supplemental Funding Support II.F, VI.D.3.b, VI.E.5s Supplementary Documentation II.B.2, II.C.2, II.C.2.d, II.C.2.j, Exhibit II 1 Supplies see Materials and Supplies Suspension of Award XII.A Synergistic Activities II.D.2.h i a 6 System for Award Management SAM I.G.2 T Tangible Property XI.D.5 Target Dates I.F.1 Tax Status XI.I Technical Reporting Requirements VII.D Telecommunications X.F Temporary Dependent Care Travel Costs II.D.2.f iv a , II.F.8, X.C.3 Termination of Award XII.A Title Equipment IX.D.1 Patents and Inventions XI.D.1 Proposed Project Supplies and Materials IX.E Tangible Property XI.D.5 Total Direct Costs II.D.2.f vii Traditional Renewal V.A Transfer of Equipment VII.B.2.f, IX.E.2.g Grant VII.B.2.f Funds VII.B.2.f, VII.B.4 Principal Investigator VII.B.2 Project Effort VII.B Travel Allowances Dependent of Key Project Personnel II.D.2.f iv a , X.C.3 Domestic II.D.2.f iv b , II.F.9, II.F.11 Foreign II.D.2.f iv c , II.F.9, II.F.11 Travel Proposal II.F.11 Tribal Governments I.E.5 Types of Proposals II.F Career Life Balance CLB Supplemental Funding Requests II.F.8 Center II.F.12 Conference II.F.9 EArly concept Grants for Exploratory Research EAGER II.F.3 Equipment II.F.10 Facilitation Awards for Scientists and Engineers with Disabilities FASED II.F.7 Grant Opportunities for Academic Liaison with Industry GOALI II.F.5 Ideas Lab II.F.6 Planning II.F.1 Rapid Response Research RAPID II.F.2 Research Advanced by Interdisciplinary Science and Engineering RAISE II.F.4 Research Infrastructure II.F.13 Travel II.F.11  U Unaffiliated Individuals .I.E.3 Unallowable Costs II.D.2.f xiii Alcoholic Beverages II.D.2.f xiii c Entertainment Costs II.D.2.f xiii a Meals and Coffee Breaks II.D.2.f xiii b Undergraduate Student, Definition Exhibit II 3 Underrecovery of Indirect Costs II.D.2.f viii , X.D.1.c Unexpended Balance VIII.B.11, VIII.D.1 Unfunded Collaborations II.D.2.d iv Uniform Resource Locators URLs II.D2.d ii , II.D.2.h i a 5 Unique Entity Identifier UEI I.G.2 Universities Institutions of Higher Education , Definition I.E.1 Unliquidated Obligations VIII.B.12 Unobligated Balance VIII.B.113 US Flag Air Carriers II.D.2.f iv a , XI.F.1.b Proposal Award Policies Procedures Guide NSF 23 1 V Vertebrate Animals II.D.2i ix , II.E.4, XI.B.3 Veterans Administration I.E Video Surveillance Services II.D.2.f xiii e , X.F Visas XI.F.4 Visual Materials II.D.2.d ii Visualization Resources II.E.7 W Wages see Salaries and Wages Wildlife Research II.E.4, XI.B.3 Withdrawal of Principal Investigator VII.B.2.d Withdrawal of Proposal IV.A Withholding Payments VIII.C.2.c Woman Owned Business II.D.2.a Working Capital Advance VIII.C.5 X XSEDE II.E.7  Proposal Award Policies Procedures Guide NSF 23 1 Privacy Act and Public Burden Statements The information requested on proposal forms and project reports is solicited under the authority of the National Science Foundation Act of 1950, as amended. The information on proposal forms will be used in connection with the selection of qualified proposals and project reports submitted by awardees will be used for program evaluation and reporting within the Executive Branch and to Congress. The information requested may be disclosed to qualified reviewers and staff assistants as part of the proposal review process to proposer institutions grantees to provide or obtain data regarding the proposal review process, award decisions, or the administration of awards to government contractors, experts, volunteers and researchers and educators as necessary to complete assigned work to other government agencies or other entities needing information regarding Proposers or nominees as part of a joint application review process, or in order to coordinate programs or policy and to another Federal agency, court, or party in a court or Federal administrative proceeding if the government is a party. Information about Principal Investigators may be added to the Reviewer file and used to select potential candidates to serve as peer reviewers or advisory committee members. See Systems of Records, NSF 50, Principal Investigator Proposal File and Associated Records, 79 Federal Register 76398 December 22, 2014 , and NSF 51, Reviewer Proposal File and Associated Records, 79 Federal Register 76398 December 22, 2014 . Submission of the information is voluntary. Failure to provide full and complete information, however, may reduce the possibility of receiving an award. An agency may not conduct or sponsor, and a person is not required to respond to, an information collection unless it displays a valid OMB control number. The OMB control number for this collection is 3145 0058. Public reporting burden for this collection of information is estimated to average 120 hours per response, including the time for reviewing instructions. Send comments regarding the burden estimate and any other aspect of this collection of information, including suggestions for reducing this burden, to Suzanne H. Plimpton Reports Clearance Officer Policy Office, Division of Institution and Award Support Office of Budget, Finance, and Award Management National Science Foundation Alexandria, VA 22314 