AN ACT concerning regulation. Be it enacted by the People of the State of Illinois, represented in the General Assembly Section 1. This Act may be referred to as the Health Care Workforce Reinforcement Act. Section 5. The Department of Professional Regulation Law of the Civil Administrative Code of Illinois is amended by changing Section 2105 400 as follows 20 ILCS 2105 2105 400 Sec. 2105 400. Emergency powers. a Upon proclamation of a disaster by the Governor, as provided for in the Illinois Emergency Management Agency Act, the Secretary of Financial and Professional Regulation shall have the following powers, which shall be exercised only in coordination with the Illinois Emergency Management Agency and the Department of Public Health 1 The power to suspend the requirements for permanent or temporary licensure of persons who are licensed in another state and are working under the direction of the Illinois Emergency Management Agency and the Department of Public Health pursuant to a declared disaster. HB0559 Enrolled LRB103 04144 BMS 49150 b Public Act 103 0001   2 The power to modify the scope of practice restrictions under any licensing act administered by the Department for any person working under the direction of the Illinois Emergency Management Agency and the Illinois Department of Public Health pursuant to the declared disaster. 3 The power to expand the exemption in Section 4 a of the Pharmacy Practice Act to those licensed professionals whose scope of practice has been modified, under paragraph 2 of subsection a of this Section, to include any element of the practice of pharmacy as defined in the Pharmacy Practice Act for any person working under the direction of the Illinois Emergency Management Agency and the Illinois Department of Public Health pursuant to the declared disaster. b Persons exempt from licensure under paragraph 1 of subsection a of this Section and persons operating under modified scope of practice provisions under paragraph 2 of subsection a of this Section shall be exempt from licensure or be subject to modified scope of practice only until the declared disaster has ended as provided by law. For purposes of this Section, persons working under the direction of an emergency services and disaster agency accredited by the Illinois Emergency Management Agency and a local public health department, pursuant to a declared disaster, shall be deemed to be working under the direction of the Illinois Emergency HB0559 Enrolled LRB103 04144 BMS 49150 b Public Act 103 0001  Management Agency and the Department of Public Health. c The Secretary or the Director, as his or her designee, shall exercise these powers by way of proclamation. d Any person who was issued a temporary out of state permit by the Department pursuant to a proclamation issued by the Secretary or related action by the Director in response to the COVID 19 pandemic may continue to practice under his or her temporary out of state permit if he or she submits an application for licensure by endorsement to the Department on or before May 11, 2023. Any such person may continue to practice under his or her temporary out of state permit until the Department issues the license or denies the application, at which time the temporary out of state permit shall expire. If the Department does not issue the license or does not deny the application by May 11, 2024, the temporary out of state permit shall expire. If the person holding a temporary out of state permit does not submit an application for licensure by endorsement to the Department on or before May 11, 2023, the temporary out of state COVID permit shall expire on that date. The Secretary may extend the May 11, 2023 deadline under this subsection for an additional 60 days. This subsection applies to the following licensed professions physician registered nurse practical nurse advanced practice registered nurse full practice advanced practice registered nurse pharmacist occupational therapist occupational therapy assistant physical therapist physical HB0559 Enrolled LRB103 04144 BMS 49150 b Public Act 103 0001  therapist assistant clinical psychologist physician assistant clinical social worker social worker dietitian nutritionist professional counselor clinical professional counselor and respiratory care practitioner. e Any person who was issued a temporary reinstatement permit by the Department pursuant to a proclamation issued by the Secretary or related action by the Director in response to the COVID 19 pandemic may continue to practice under his or her temporary reinstatement permit if he or she submits an application for restoration or reinstatement of his or her license to the Department on or before May 11, 2023. Any such person may continue to practice under his or her temporary reinstatement permit until the Department restores or reinstates the license or denies the application, at which time the temporary reinstatement permit shall expire. If the Department does not restore or reinstate the license or does not deny the application by May 11, 2024, the temporary reinstatement permit shall expire. If the person holding a temporary reinstatement permit does not submit an application for restoration or reinstatement to the Department on or before May 11, 2023, the temporary reinstatement permit shall expire on that date. The Secretary may extend the May 11, 2023 deadline under this subsection for an additional 60 days. This subsection applies to the following licensed professions physician registered nurse practical nurse advanced practice registered nurse full practice advanced practice HB0559 Enrolled LRB103 04144 BMS 49150 b Public Act 103 0001  registered nurse pharmacist occupational therapist occupational therapy assistant physical therapist physical therapist assistant clinical psychologist physician assistant clinical social worker social worker dietitian nutritionist professional counselor clinical professional counselor and respiratory care practitioner. Source P.A. 99 227, eff. 8 3 15. Section 10. The Assisted Living and Shared Housing Act is amended by changing Sections 40 and 110 as follows 210 ILCS 9 40 Sec. 40. Probationary licenses. If the applicant has not been previously licensed under this Act or if the establishment is not in operation at the time the application is made and if the Department determines that the applicant meets the licensure requirements of this Act, the Department shall issue a probationary license. A probationary license shall be valid for 120 days unless sooner suspended or revoked. Within 30 days prior to the termination of a probationary license, the Department shall fully and completely review the establishment and, if the establishment meets the applicable requirements for licensure, shall issue a license, except that, during a statewide public health emergency, as defined in the Illinois Emergency Management Agency Act, the Department shall fully and completely review HB0559 Enrolled LRB103 04144 BMS 49150 b Public Act 103 0001  the establishment to the extent feasible. If the Department finds that the establishment does not meet the requirements for licensure, but has made substantial progress toward meeting those requirements, the license may be renewed once for a period not to exceed 120 days from the expiration date of the initial probationary license. Source P.A. 93 1003, eff. 8 23 04. 210 ILCS 9 110 Sec. 110. Powers and duties of the Department. a The Department shall conduct an annual unannounced on site visit at each assisted living and shared housing establishment to determine compliance with applicable licensure requirements and standards, except that, during a statewide public health emergency, as defined in the Illinois Emergency Management Agency Act, the Department shall conduct on site reviews and annual unannounced on site visits to the extent feasible. Additional visits may be conducted without prior notice to the assisted living or shared housing establishment. b Upon receipt of information that may indicate the failure of the assisted living or shared housing establishment or a service provider to comply with a provision of this Act, the Department shall investigate the matter or make appropriate referrals to other government agencies and entities having jurisdiction over the subject matter of the HB0559 Enrolled LRB103 04144 BMS 49150 b Public Act 103 0001  possible violation. The Department may also make referrals to any public or private agency that the Department considers available for appropriate assistance to those involved. The Department may oversee and coordinate the enforcement of State consumer protection policies affecting residents residing in an establishment licensed under this Act. c The Department shall establish by rule complaint receipt, investigation, resolution, and involuntary residency termination procedures. Resolution procedures shall provide for on site review and evaluation of an assisted living or shared housing establishment found to be in violation of this Act within a specified period of time based on the gravity and severity of the violation and any pervasive pattern of occurrences of the same or similar violations. d Blank . e The Department shall by rule establish penalties and sanctions, which shall include, but need not be limited to, the creation of a schedule of graduated penalties and sanctions to include closure. f The Department shall by rule establish procedures for disclosure of information to the public, which shall include, but not be limited to, ownership, licensure status, frequency of complaints, disposition of substantiated complaints, and disciplinary actions. g Blank . h Beginning January 1, 2000, the Department shall begin HB0559 Enrolled LRB103 04144 BMS 49150 b Public Act 103 0001  drafting rules necessary for the administration of this Act. Source P.A. 96 975, eff. 7 2 10. Section 15. The Nursing Home Care Act is amended by changing Sections 3 102.2, 3 116, 3 202.5, 3 202.6, 3 206, and 3 702 as follows 210 ILCS 45 3 102.2 Sec. 3 102.2. Supported congregate living arrangement demonstration. The Illinois Department may grant no more than 3 waivers from the requirements of this Act for facilities participating in the supported congregate living arrangement demonstration. A joint waiver request must be made by an applicant and the Department on Aging. If the Department on Aging does not act upon an application within 60 days, the applicant may submit a written waiver request on its own behalf. The waiver request must include a specific program plan describing the types of residents to be served and the services that will be provided in the facility. The Department shall conduct an on site review at each facility annually or as often as necessary to ascertain compliance with the program plan, except that, during a statewide public health emergency, as defined in the Illinois Emergency Management Agency Act, the Department shall conduct on site reviews and annual unannounced on site visits to the extent feasible. The Department may revoke the waiver if it determines that the HB0559 Enrolled LRB103 04144 BMS 49150 b Public Act 103 0001  facility is not in compliance with the program plan. Nothing in this Section prohibits the Department from conducting complaint investigations. A facility granted a waiver under this Section is not subject to the Illinois Health Facilities Planning Act, unless it subsequently applies for a certificate of need to convert to a nursing facility. A facility applying for conversion shall meet the licensure and certificate of need requirements in effect as of the date of application, and this provision may not be waived. Source P.A. 89 530, eff. 7 19 96. 210 ILCS 45 3 116 from Ch. 111 1 2, par. 4153 116 Sec. 3 116. If the applicant has not been previously licensed or if the facility is not in operation at the time application is made, the Department shall issue only a probationary license. A probationary license shall be valid for 120 days unless sooner suspended or revoked under Section 3 119. Within 30 days prior to the termination of a probationary license, the Department shall fully and completely inspect the facility and, if the facility meets the applicable requirements for licensure, shall issue a license under Section 3 109, except that, during a statewide public health emergency, as defined in the Illinois Emergency Management Agency Act, the Department shall fully and completely inspect the establishment within appropriate time HB0559 Enrolled LRB103 04144 BMS 49150 b Public Act 103 0001  frames to the extent feasible. If the Department finds that the facility does not meet the requirements for licensure but has made substantial progress toward meeting those requirements, the license may be renewed once for a period not to exceed 120 days from the expiration date of the initial probationary license. Source P.A. 81 223. 210 ILCS 45 3 202.5 Sec. 3 202.5. Facility plan review fees. a Before commencing construction of a new facility or specified types of alteration or additions to an existing long term care facility involving major construction, as defined by rule by the Department, with an estimated cost greater than 100,000, architectural drawings and specifications for the facility shall be submitted to the Department for review and approval. A facility may submit architectural drawings and specifications for other construction projects for Department review according to subsection b that shall not be subject to fees under subsection d . Review of drawings and specifications shall be conducted by an employee of the Department meeting the qualifications established by the Department of Central Management Services class specifications for such an individual s position or by a person contracting with the Department who meets those class specifications. Final approval of the drawings and specifications for HB0559 Enrolled LRB103 04144 BMS 49150 b Public Act 103 0001  compliance with design and construction standards shall be obtained from the Department before the alteration, addition, or new construction is begun. b The Department shall inform an applicant in writing within 10 working days after receiving drawings and specifications and the required fee, if any, from the applicant whether the applicant s submission is complete or incomplete. Failure to provide the applicant with this notice within 10 working days shall result in the submission being deemed complete for purposes of initiating the 60 day review period under this Section. If the submission is incomplete, the Department shall inform the applicant of the deficiencies with the submission in writing. If the submission is complete the required fee, if any, has been paid, the Department shall approve or disapprove drawings and specifications submitted to the Department no later than 60 days following receipt by the Department. The drawings and specifications shall be of sufficient detail, as provided by Department rule, to enable the Department to render a determination of compliance with design and construction standards under this Act. If the Department finds that the drawings are not of sufficient detail for it to render a determination of compliance, the plans shall be determined to be incomplete and shall not be considered for purposes of initiating the 60 day 60 day review period. If a submission of drawings and specifications is incomplete, the applicant may submit additional information. HB0559 Enrolled LRB103 04144 BMS 49150 b Public Act 103 0001  The 60 day review period shall not commence until the Department determines that a submission of drawings and specifications is complete or the submission is deemed complete. If the Department has not approved or disapproved the drawings and specifications within 60 days, the construction, major alteration, or addition shall be deemed approved. If the drawings and specifications are disapproved, the Department shall state in writing, with specificity, the reasons for the disapproval. The entity submitting the drawings and specifications may submit additional information in response to the written comments from the Department or request a reconsideration of the disapproval. A final decision of approval or disapproval shall be made within 45 days of the receipt of the additional information or reconsideration request. If denied, the Department shall state the specific reasons for the denial. c The Department shall provide written approval for occupancy pursuant to subsection g and shall not issue a violation to a facility as a result of a licensure or complaint survey based upon the facility s physical structure if 1 the Department reviewed and approved or deemed approved the drawings and specifications for compliance with design and construction standards 2 the construction, major alteration, or addition was built as submitted 3 the law or rules have not been amended since the HB0559 Enrolled LRB103 04144 BMS 49150 b Public Act 103 0001  original approval and 4 the conditions at the facility indicate that there is a reasonable degree of safety provided for the residents. d The Department shall charge the following fees in connection with its reviews conducted before June 30, 2004 under this Section 1 Blank . 2 Blank . 3 If the estimated dollar value of the alteration, addition, or new construction is 100,000 or more but less than 500,000, the fee shall be the greater of 2,400 or 1.2 of that value. 4 If the estimated dollar value of the alteration, addition, or new construction is 500,000 or more but less than 1,000,000, the fee shall be the greater of 6,000 or 0.96 of that value. 5 If the estimated dollar value of the alteration, addition, or new construction is 1,000,000 or more but less than 5,000,000, the fee shall be the greater of 9,600 or 0.22 of that value. 6 If the estimated dollar value of the alteration, addition, or new construction is 5,000,000 or more, the fee shall be the greater of 11,000 or 0.11 of that value, but shall not exceed 40,000. The fees provided in this subsection d shall not apply HB0559 Enrolled LRB103 04144 BMS 49150 b Public Act 103 0001  to major construction projects involving facility changes that are required by Department rule amendments. The fees provided in this subsection d shall also not apply to major construction projects if 51 or more of the estimated cost of the project is attributed to capital equipment. For major construction projects where 51 or more of the estimated cost of the project is attributed to capital equipment, the Department shall by rule establish a fee that is reasonably related to the cost of reviewing the project. The Department shall not commence the facility plan review process under this Section until the applicable fee has been paid. e All fees received by the Department under this Section shall be deposited into the Health Facility Plan Review Fund, a special fund created in the State Treasury. All fees paid by long term care facilities under subsection d shall be used only to cover the costs relating to the Department s review of long term care facility projects under this Section. Moneys shall be appropriated from that Fund to the Department only to pay the costs of conducting reviews under this Section or under Section 3 202.5 of the ID DD Community Care Act or Section 3 202.5 of the MC DD Act. None of the moneys in the Health Facility Plan Review Fund shall be used to reduce the amount of General Revenue Fund moneys appropriated to the Department for facility plan reviews conducted pursuant to this Section. HB0559 Enrolled LRB103 04144 BMS 49150 b Public Act 103 0001   f 1 The provisions of this amendatory Act of 1997 concerning drawings and specifications shall apply only to drawings and specifications submitted to the Department on or after October 1, 1997. 2 On and after the effective date of this amendatory Act of 1997 and before October 1, 1997, an applicant may submit or resubmit drawings and specifications to the Department and pay the fees provided in subsection d . If an applicant pays the fees provided in subsection d under this paragraph 2 , the provisions of subsection b shall apply with regard to those drawings and specifications. g The Department shall conduct an on site inspection of the completed project no later than 30 days after notification from the applicant that the project has been completed and all certifications required by the Department have been received and accepted by the Department, except that, during a statewide public health emergency, as defined in the Illinois Emergency Management Agency Act, the Department shall conduct an on site inspection of the completed project to the extent feasible. The Department shall provide written approval for occupancy to the applicant within 5 working days of the Department s final inspection, provided the applicant has demonstrated substantial compliance as defined by Department rule. Occupancy of new major construction is prohibited until Department approval is received, unless the Department has not acted within the time frames provided in this subsection g , HB0559 Enrolled LRB103 04144 BMS 49150 b Public Act 103 0001  in which case the construction shall be deemed approved. Occupancy shall be authorized after any required health inspection by the Department has been conducted. h The Department shall establish, by rule, a procedure to conduct interim on site review of large or complex construction projects. i The Department shall establish, by rule, an expedited process for emergency repairs or replacement of like equipment. j Nothing in this Section shall be construed to apply to maintenance, upkeep, or renovation that does not affect the structural integrity of the building, does not add beds or services over the number for which the long term care facility is licensed, and provides a reasonable degree of safety for the residents. Source P.A. 98 104, eff. 7 22 13 99 180, eff. 7 29 15. 210 ILCS 45 3 202.6 Sec. 3 202.6. Department of Veterans Affairs facility plan review. a Before commencing construction of a new facility or specified types of alteration or additions to an existing long term care facility involving major construction, as defined by rule by the Department, with an estimated cost greater than 100,000, architectural drawings and specifications for the facility shall be submitted to the HB0559 Enrolled LRB103 04144 BMS 49150 b Public Act 103 0001  Department for review. A facility may submit architectural drawings and specifications for other construction projects for Department review according to subsection b of this Section. Review of drawings and specifications shall be conducted by an employee of the Department meeting the qualifications established by the Department of Central Management Services class specifications for such an individual s position or by a person contracting with the Department who meets those class specifications. b The Department shall inform an applicant in writing within 15 working days after receiving drawings and specifications from the applicant whether the applicant s submission is complete or incomplete. Failure to provide the applicant with this notice within 15 working days after receiving drawings and specifications from the applicant shall result in the submission being deemed complete for purposes of initiating the 60 working day review period under this Section. If the submission is incomplete, the Department shall inform the applicant of the deficiencies with the submission in writing. If the submission is complete, the Department shall approve or disapprove drawings and specifications submitted to the Department no later than 60 working days following receipt by the Department. The drawings and specifications shall be of sufficient detail, as provided by Department rule, to enable the Department to render a determination of compliance with HB0559 Enrolled LRB103 04144 BMS 49150 b Public Act 103 0001  design and construction standards under this Act. If the Department finds that the drawings are not of sufficient detail for it to render a determination of compliance, the plans shall be determined to be incomplete and shall not be considered for purposes of initiating the 60 working day review period. If a submission of drawings and specifications is incomplete, the applicant may submit additional information. The 60 working day review period shall not commence until the Department determines that a submission of drawings and specifications is complete or the submission is deemed complete. If the Department has not approved or disapproved the drawings and specifications within 60 working days after receipt by the Department, the construction, major alteration, or addition shall be deemed approved. If the drawings and specifications are disapproved, the Department shall state in writing, with specificity, the reasons for the disapproval. The entity submitting the drawings and specifications may submit additional information in response to the written comments from the Department or request a reconsideration of the disapproval. A final decision of approval or disapproval shall be made within 45 working days after the receipt of the additional information or reconsideration request. If denied, the Department shall state the specific reasons for the denial. c The Department shall provide written approval for occupancy pursuant to subsection e of this Section and shall HB0559 Enrolled LRB103 04144 BMS 49150 b Public Act 103 0001  not issue a violation to a facility as a result of a licensure or complaint survey based upon the facility s physical structure if 1 the Department reviewed and approved or is deemed to have approved the drawings and specifications for compliance with design and construction standards 2 the construction, major alteration, or addition was built as submitted 3 the law or rules have not been amended since the original approval and 4 the conditions at the facility indicate that there is a reasonable degree of safety provided for the residents. d The Department shall not charge a fee in connection with its reviews to the Department of Veterans Affairs. e The Department shall conduct an on site inspection of the completed project no later than 45 working days after notification from the applicant that the project has been completed and all certifications required by the Department have been received and accepted by the Department, except that, during a statewide public health emergency, as defined in the Illinois Emergency Management Agency Act, the Department shall conduct an on site inspection of the completed project to the extent feasible. The Department may extend this deadline if a federally mandated survey time frame takes precedence. The Department shall provide written HB0559 Enrolled LRB103 04144 BMS 49150 b Public Act 103 0001  approval for occupancy to the applicant within 7 working days after the Department s final inspection, provided the applicant has demonstrated substantial compliance as defined by Department rule. Occupancy of new major construction is prohibited until Department approval is received, unless the Department has not acted within the time frames provided in this subsection e , in which case the construction shall be deemed approved. Occupancy shall be authorized after any required health inspection by the Department has been conducted. f The Department shall establish, by rule, an expedited process for emergency repairs or replacement of like equipment. g Nothing in this Section shall be construed to apply to maintenance, upkeep, or renovation that does not affect the structural integrity or fire or life safety of the building, does not add beds or services over the number for which the long term care facility is licensed, and provides a reasonable degree of safety for the residents. h If the number of licensed facilities increases or the number of beds for the currently licensed facilities increases, the Department has the right to reassess the mandated time frames listed in this Section. Source P.A. 99 314, eff. 8 7 15. 210 ILCS 45 3 206 from Ch. 111 1 2, par. 4153 206 HB0559 Enrolled LRB103 04144 BMS 49150 b Public Act 103 0001  Sec. 3 206. The Department shall prescribe a curriculum for training nursing assistants, habilitation aides, and child care aides. a No person, except a volunteer who receives no compensation from a facility and is not included for the purpose of meeting any staffing requirements set forth by the Department, shall act as a nursing assistant, habilitation aide, or child care aide in a facility, nor shall any person, under any other title, not licensed, certified, or registered to render medical care by the Department of Financial and Professional Regulation, assist with the personal, medical, or nursing care of residents in a facility, unless such person meets the following requirements 1 Be at least 16 years of age, of temperate habits and good moral character, honest, reliable and trustworthy. 2 Be able to speak and understand the English language or a language understood by a substantial percentage of the facility s residents. 3 Provide evidence of employment or occupation, if any, and residence for 2 years prior to his present employment. 4 Have completed at least 8 years of grade school or provide proof of equivalent knowledge. 5 Begin a current course of training for nursing assistants, habilitation aides, or child care aides, HB0559 Enrolled LRB103 04144 BMS 49150 b Public Act 103 0001  approved by the Department, within 45 days of initial employment in the capacity of a nursing assistant, habilitation aide, or child care aide at any facility. Such courses of training shall be successfully completed within 120 days of initial employment in the capacity of nursing assistant, habilitation aide, or child care aide at a facility. Nursing assistants, habilitation aides, and child care aides who are enrolled in approved courses in community colleges or other educational institutions on a term, semester, or trimester basis, shall be exempt from the 120 day completion time limit. During a statewide public health emergency, as defined in the Illinois Emergency Management Agency Act, all nursing assistants, habilitation aides, and child care aides shall, to the extent feasible, complete the training. The Department shall adopt rules for such courses of training. These rules shall include procedures for facilities to carry on an approved course of training within the facility. The Department shall allow an individual to satisfy the supervised clinical experience requirement for placement on the Health Care Worker Registry under 77 Ill. Adm. Code 300.663 through supervised clinical experience at an assisted living establishment licensed under the Assisted Living and Shared Housing Act. The Department shall adopt rules requiring that the Health Care Worker Registry include information identifying where an individual on the HB0559 Enrolled LRB103 04144 BMS 49150 b Public Act 103 0001  Health Care Worker Registry received his or her clinical training. The Department may accept comparable training in lieu of the 120 hour course for student nurses, foreign nurses, military personnel, or employees of the Department of Human Services. The Department shall accept on the job experience in lieu of clinical training from any individual who participated in the temporary nursing assistant program during the COVID 19 pandemic before the end date of the temporary nursing assistant program and left the program in good standing, and the Department shall notify all approved certified nurse assistant training programs in the State of this requirement. The individual shall receive one hour of credit for every hour employed as a temporary nursing assistant, up to 40 total hours, and shall be permitted 90 days after the end date of the temporary nursing assistant program to enroll in an approved certified nursing assistant training program and 240 days to successfully complete the certified nursing assistant training program. Temporary nursing assistants who enroll in a certified nursing assistant training program within 90 days of the end of the temporary nursing assistant program may continue to work as a nursing assistant for up to 240 days after enrollment in the certified nursing assistant training program. As used in HB0559 Enrolled LRB103 04144 BMS 49150 b Public Act 103 0001  this Section, temporary nursing assistant program means the program implemented by the Department of Public Health by emergency rule, as listed in 44 Ill. Reg. 7936, effective April 21, 2020. The facility shall develop and implement procedures, which shall be approved by the Department, for an ongoing review process, which shall take place within the facility, for nursing assistants, habilitation aides, and child care aides. At the time of each regularly scheduled licensure survey, or at the time of a complaint investigation, the Department may require any nursing assistant, habilitation aide, or child care aide to demonstrate, either through written examination or action, or both, sufficient knowledge in all areas of required training. If such knowledge is inadequate the Department shall require the nursing assistant, habilitation aide, or child care aide to complete inservice training and review in the facility until the nursing assistant, habilitation aide, or child care aide demonstrates to the Department, either through written examination or action, or both, sufficient knowledge in all areas of required training. 6 Be familiar with and have general skills related to resident care. a 0.5 An educational entity, other than a secondary school, conducting a nursing assistant, habilitation aide, or HB0559 Enrolled LRB103 04144 BMS 49150 b Public Act 103 0001  child care aide training program shall initiate a criminal history record check in accordance with the Health Care Worker Background Check Act prior to entry of an individual into the training program. A secondary school may initiate a criminal history record check in accordance with the Health Care Worker Background Check Act at any time during or after a training program. a 1 Nursing assistants, habilitation aides, or child care aides seeking to be included on the Health Care Worker Registry under the Health Care Worker Background Check Act on or after January 1, 1996 must authorize the Department of Public Health or its designee to request a criminal history record check in accordance with the Health Care Worker Background Check Act and submit all necessary information. An individual may not newly be included on the Health Care Worker Registry unless a criminal history record check has been conducted with respect to the individual. b Persons subject to this Section shall perform their duties under the supervision of a licensed nurse. c It is unlawful for any facility to employ any person in the capacity of nursing assistant, habilitation aide, or child care aide, or under any other title, not licensed by the State of Illinois to assist in the personal, medical, or nursing care of residents in such facility unless such person has complied with this Section. d Proof of compliance by each employee with the HB0559 Enrolled LRB103 04144 BMS 49150 b Public Act 103 0001  requirements set out in this Section shall be maintained for each such employee by each facility in the individual personnel folder of the employee. Proof of training shall be obtained only from the Health Care Worker Registry. e Each facility shall obtain access to the Health Care Worker Registry s web application, maintain the employment and demographic information relating to each employee, and verify by the category and type of employment that each employee subject to this Section meets all the requirements of this Section. f Any facility that is operated under Section 3 803 shall be exempt from the requirements of this Section. g Each skilled nursing and intermediate care facility that admits persons who are diagnosed as having Alzheimer s disease or related dementias shall require all nursing assistants, habilitation aides, or child care aides, who did not receive 12 hours of training in the care and treatment of such residents during the training required under paragraph 5 of subsection a , to obtain 12 hours of in house training in the care and treatment of such residents. If the facility does not provide the training in house, the training shall be obtained from other facilities, community colleges or other educational institutions that have a recognized course for such training. The Department shall, by rule, establish a recognized course for such training. The Department s rules shall provide that such training may be conducted in house at HB0559 Enrolled LRB103 04144 BMS 49150 b Public Act 103 0001  each facility subject to the requirements of this subsection, in which case such training shall be monitored by the Department. The Department s rules shall also provide for circumstances and procedures whereby any person who has received training that meets the requirements of this subsection shall not be required to undergo additional training if he or she is transferred to or obtains employment at a different facility or a facility other than a long term care facility but remains continuously employed for pay as a nursing assistant, habilitation aide, or child care aide. Individuals who have performed no nursing or nursing related services for a period of 24 consecutive months shall be listed as inactive and as such do not meet the requirements of this Section. Licensed sheltered care facilities shall be exempt from the requirements of this Section. An individual employed during the COVID 19 pandemic as a nursing assistant in accordance with any Executive Orders, emergency rules, or policy memoranda related to COVID 19 shall be assumed to meet competency standards and may continue to be employed as a certified nurse assistant when the pandemic ends and the Executive Orders or emergency rules lapse. Such individuals shall be listed on the Department s Health Care Worker Registry website as active . Source P.A. 100 297, eff. 8 24 17 100 432, eff. 8 25 17 100 863, eff. 8 14 18 101 655, eff. 3 12 21. HB0559 Enrolled LRB103 04144 BMS 49150 b Public Act 103 0001   210 ILCS 45 3 702 from Ch. 111 1 2, par. 4153 702 Sec. 3 702. a A person who believes that this Act or a rule promulgated under this Act may have been violated may request an investigation. The request may be submitted to the Department in writing, by telephone, by electronic means, or by personal visit. An oral complaint shall be reduced to writing by the Department. The Department shall make available, through its website and upon request, information regarding the oral and phone intake processes and the list of questions that will be asked of the complainant. The Department shall request information identifying the complainant, including the name, address, and telephone number, to help enable appropriate follow up. The Department shall act on such complaints via on site visits or other methods deemed appropriate to handle the complaints with or without such identifying information, as otherwise provided under this Section. The complainant shall be informed that compliance with such request is not required to satisfy the procedures for filing a complaint under this Act. The Department must notify complainants that complaints with less information provided are far more difficult to respond to and investigate. b The substance of the complaint shall be provided in writing to the licensee, owner, or administrator no earlier than at the commencement of an on site inspection of the HB0559 Enrolled LRB103 04144 BMS 49150 b Public Act 103 0001  facility which takes place pursuant to the complaint. c The Department shall not disclose the name of the complainant unless the complainant consents in writing to the disclosure or the investigation results in a judicial proceeding, or unless disclosure is essential to the investigation. The complainant shall be given the opportunity to withdraw the complaint before disclosure. Upon the request of the complainant, the Department may permit the complainant or a representative of the complainant to accompany the person making the on site inspection of the facility. d Upon receipt of a complaint, the Department shall determine whether this Act or a rule promulgated under this Act has been or is being violated. The Department shall investigate all complaints alleging abuse or neglect within 7 days after the receipt of the complaint except that complaints of abuse or neglect which indicate that a resident s life or safety is in imminent danger shall be investigated within 24 hours after receipt of the complaint. All other complaints shall be investigated within 30 days after the receipt of the complaint, except that, during a statewide public health emergency, as defined in the Illinois Emergency Management Agency Act, all other complaints shall be investigated within appropriate time frames to the extent feasible. The Department employees investigating a complaint shall conduct a brief, informal exit conference with the facility to alert its administration of any suspected serious deficiency that poses HB0559 Enrolled LRB103 04144 BMS 49150 b Public Act 103 0001  a direct threat to the health, safety, or welfare of a resident to enable an immediate correction for the alleviation or elimination of such threat. Such information and findings discussed in the brief exit conference shall become a part of the investigating record but shall not in any way constitute an official or final notice of violation as provided under Section 3 301. All complaints shall be classified as an invalid report , a valid report , or an undetermined report . For any complaint classified as a valid report , the Department must determine within 30 working days after any Department employee enters a facility to begin an on site inspection if any rule or provision of this Act has been or is being violated. d 1 The Department shall, whenever possible, combine an on site investigation of a complaint in a facility with other inspections in order to avoid duplication of inspections. e In all cases, the Department shall inform the complainant of its findings within 10 days of its determination unless otherwise indicated by the complainant, and the complainant may direct the Department to send a copy of such findings to another person. The Department s findings may include comments or documentation provided by either the complainant or the licensee pertaining to the complaint. The Department shall also notify the facility of such findings within 10 days of the determination, but the name of the complainant or residents shall not be disclosed in this notice HB0559 Enrolled LRB103 04144 BMS 49150 b Public Act 103 0001  to the facility. The notice of such findings shall include a copy of the written determination the correction order, if any the warning notice, if any the inspection report or the State licensure form on which the violation is listed. f A written determination, correction order, or warning notice concerning a complaint, together with the facility s response, shall be available for public inspection, but the name of the complainant or resident shall not be disclosed without his consent. g A complainant who is dissatisfied with the determination or investigation by the Department may request a hearing under Section 3 703. The facility shall be given notice of any such hearing and may participate in the hearing as a party. If a facility requests a hearing under Section 3 703 which concerns a matter covered by a complaint, the complainant shall be given notice and may participate in the hearing as a party. A request for a hearing by either a complainant or a facility shall be submitted in writing to the Department within 30 days after the mailing of the Department s findings as described in subsection e of this Section. Upon receipt of the request the Department shall conduct a hearing as provided under Section 3 703. g 5 The Department shall conduct an annual review of all survey activity from the preceding fiscal year and make a report concerning the complaint and survey process. The report shall include, but not be limited to HB0559 Enrolled LRB103 04144 BMS 49150 b Public Act 103 0001   1 the total number of complaints received 2 the breakdown of 24 hour, 7 day, and 30 day complaints 3 the breakdown of anonymous and non anonymous complaints 4 the number of complaints that were substantiated versus unsubstantiated 5 the total number of substantiated complaints that were completed in the time frame determined under subsection d 6 the total number of informal dispute resolutions requested 7 the total number of informal dispute resolution requests approved 8 the total number of informal dispute resolutions that were overturned or reduced in severity 9 the total number of nurse surveyors hired during the calendar year 10 the total number of nurse surveyors who left Department employment 11 the average length of tenure for nurse surveyors employed by the Department at the time the report is created 12 the total number of times the Department imposed discretionary denial of payment within 15 days of notice and within 2 days of notice as well as the number of times HB0559 Enrolled LRB103 04144 BMS 49150 b Public Act 103 0001  the discretionary denial of payment took effect and 13 any other complaint information requested by the Long Term Care Facility Advisory Board created under Section 2 204 of this Act or the Illinois Long Term Care Council created under Section 4.04a of the Illinois Act on the Aging. This report shall be provided to the Long Term Care Facility Advisory Board, the Illinois Long Term Care Council, and the General Assembly. The Long Term Care Facility Advisory Board and the Illinois Long Term Care Council shall review the report and suggest any changes deemed necessary to the Department for review and action, including how to investigate and substantiate anonymous complaints. h Any person who knowingly transmits a false report to the Department commits the offense of disorderly conduct under subsection a 8 of Section 26 1 of the Criminal Code of 2012. Source P.A. 102 432, eff. 8 20 21 102 947, eff. 1 1 23 revised 12 9 22. Section 20. The MC DD Act is amended by changing Sections 3 116, 3 202.5, and 3 702 as follows 210 ILCS 46 3 116 Sec. 3 116. Probationary license. If the applicant has not been previously licensed or if the facility is not in HB0559 Enrolled LRB103 04144 BMS 49150 b Public Act 103 0001  operation at the time application is made, the Department shall issue only a probationary license. A probationary license shall be valid for 120 days unless sooner suspended or revoked under Section 3 119. Within 30 days prior to the termination of a probationary license, the Department shall fully and completely inspect the facility and, if the facility meets the applicable requirements for licensure, shall issue a license under Section 3 109, except that, during a statewide public health emergency, as defined in the Illinois Emergency Management Agency Act, the Department shall inspect facilities within an appropriate time frame to the extent feasible. If the Department finds that the facility does not meet the requirements for licensure but has made substantial progress toward meeting those requirements, the license may be renewed once for a period not to exceed 120 days from the expiration date of the initial probationary license. Source P.A. 99 180, eff. 7 29 15. 210 ILCS 46 3 202.5 Sec. 3 202.5. Facility plan review fees. a Before commencing construction of a new facility or specified types of alteration or additions to an existing facility involving major construction, as defined by rule by the Department, with an estimated cost greater than 100,000, architectural drawings and specifications for the facility shall be submitted to the Department for review and approval. HB0559 Enrolled LRB103 04144 BMS 49150 b Public Act 103 0001  A facility may submit architectural drawings and specifications for other construction projects for Department review according to subsection b that shall not be subject to fees under subsection d . Review of drawings and specifications shall be conducted by an employee of the Department meeting the qualifications established by the Department of Central Management Services class specifications for such an individual s position or by a person contracting with the Department who meets those class specifications. Final approval of the drawings and specifications for compliance with design and construction standards shall be obtained from the Department before the alteration, addition, or new construction is begun. b The Department shall inform an applicant in writing within 10 working days after receiving drawings and specifications and the required fee, if any, from the applicant whether the applicant s submission is complete or incomplete. Failure to provide the applicant with this notice within 10 working days shall result in the submission being deemed complete for purposes of initiating the 60 day 60 day review period under this Section. If the submission is incomplete, the Department shall inform the applicant of the deficiencies with the submission in writing. If the submission is complete the required fee, if any, has been paid, the Department shall approve or disapprove drawings and specifications submitted to the Department no later than 60 HB0559 Enrolled LRB103 04144 BMS 49150 b Public Act 103 0001  days following receipt by the Department. The drawings and specifications shall be of sufficient detail, as provided by Department rule, to enable the Department to render a determination of compliance with design and construction standards under this Act. If the Department finds that the drawings are not of sufficient detail for it to render a determination of compliance, the plans shall be determined to be incomplete and shall not be considered for purposes of initiating the 60 day review period. If a submission of drawings and specifications is incomplete, the applicant may submit additional information. The 60 day review period shall not commence until the Department determines that a submission of drawings and specifications is complete or the submission is deemed complete. If the Department has not approved or disapproved the drawings and specifications within 60 days, the construction, major alteration, or addition shall be deemed approved. If the drawings and specifications are disapproved, the Department shall state in writing, with specificity, the reasons for the disapproval. The entity submitting the drawings and specifications may submit additional information in response to the written comments from the Department or request a reconsideration of the disapproval. A final decision of approval or disapproval shall be made within 45 days of the receipt of the additional information or reconsideration request. If denied, the Department shall state the specific reasons for the denial. HB0559 Enrolled LRB103 04144 BMS 49150 b Public Act 103 0001   c The Department shall provide written approval for occupancy pursuant to subsection g and shall not issue a violation to a facility as a result of a licensure or complaint survey based upon the facility s physical structure if 1 the Department reviewed and approved or deemed approved the drawings and specifications for compliance with design and construction standards 2 the construction, major alteration, or addition was built as submitted 3 the law or rules have not been amended since the original approval and 4 the conditions at the facility indicate that there is a reasonable degree of safety provided for the residents. d Blank . e All fees received by the Department under this Section shall be deposited into the Health Facility Plan Review Fund, a special fund created in the State Treasury. Moneys shall be appropriated from that Fund to the Department only to pay the costs of conducting reviews under this Section, under Section 3 202.5 of the Nursing Home Care Act, or under Section 3 202.5 of the ID DD Community Care Act. None of the moneys in the Health Facility Plan Review Fund shall be used to reduce the amount of General Revenue Fund moneys appropriated to the Department for facility plan reviews conducted pursuant to this Section. HB0559 Enrolled LRB103 04144 BMS 49150 b Public Act 103 0001   f Blank . g The Department shall conduct an on site inspection of the completed project no later than 30 days after notification from the applicant that the project has been completed and all certifications required by the Department have been received and accepted by the Department, except that, during a statewide public health emergency, as defined in the Illinois Emergency Management Agency Act, the Department shall conduct an on site inspection to the extent feasible. The Department shall provide written approval for occupancy to the applicant within 5 working days of the Department s final inspection, provided the applicant has demonstrated substantial compliance as defined by Department rule. Occupancy of new major construction is prohibited until Department approval is received, unless the Department has not acted within the time frames provided in this subsection g , in which case the construction shall be deemed approved. Occupancy shall be authorized after any required health inspection by the Department has been conducted. h The Department shall establish, by rule, a procedure to conduct interim on site review of large or complex construction projects. i The Department shall establish, by rule, an expedited process for emergency repairs or replacement of like equipment. j Nothing in this Section shall be construed to apply to HB0559 Enrolled LRB103 04144 BMS 49150 b Public Act 103 0001  maintenance, upkeep, or renovation that does not affect the structural integrity of the building, does not add beds or services over the number for which the facility is licensed, and provides a reasonable degree of safety for the residents. Source P.A. 99 180, eff. 7 29 15. 210 ILCS 46 3 702 Sec. 3 702. Request for investigation of violation. a A person who believes that this Act or a rule promulgated under this Act may have been violated may request an investigation. The request may be submitted to the Department in writing, by telephone, by electronic means, or by personal visit. An oral complaint shall be reduced to writing by the Department. The Department shall make available, through its website and upon request, information regarding the oral and phone intake processes and the list of questions that will be asked of the complainant. The Department shall request information identifying the complainant, including the name, address and telephone number, to help enable appropriate follow up. The Department shall act on such complaints via on site visits or other methods deemed appropriate to handle the complaints with or without such identifying information, as otherwise provided under this Section. The complainant shall be informed that compliance with such request is not required to satisfy the procedures for filing a complaint under this Act. The Department must HB0559 Enrolled LRB103 04144 BMS 49150 b Public Act 103 0001  notify complainants that complaints with less information provided are far more difficult to respond to and investigate. b The substance of the complaint shall be provided in writing to the licensee, owner or administrator no earlier than at the commencement of an on site inspection of the facility which takes place pursuant to the complaint. c The Department shall not disclose the name of the complainant unless the complainant consents in writing to the disclosure or the investigation results in a judicial proceeding, or unless disclosure is essential to the investigation. The complainant shall be given the opportunity to withdraw the complaint before disclosure. Upon the request of the complainant, the Department may permit the complainant or a representative of the complainant to accompany the person making the on site inspection of the facility. d Upon receipt of a complaint, the Department shall determine whether this Act or a rule promulgated under this Act has been or is being violated. The Department shall investigate all complaints alleging abuse or neglect within 7 days after the receipt of the complaint except that complaints of abuse or neglect which indicate that a resident s life or safety is in imminent danger shall be investigated within 24 hours after receipt of the complaint. All other complaints shall be investigated within 30 days after the receipt of the complaint, except that, during a statewide public health emergency, as defined in the Illinois Emergency Management HB0559 Enrolled LRB103 04144 BMS 49150 b Public Act 103 0001  Agency Act, all other complaints shall be investigated within an appropriate time frame to the extent feasible. The Department employees investigating a complaint shall conduct a brief, informal exit conference with the facility to alert its administration of any suspected serious deficiency that poses a direct threat to the health, safety or welfare of a resident to enable an immediate correction for the alleviation or elimination of such threat. Such information and findings discussed in the brief exit conference shall become a part of the investigating record but shall not in any way constitute an official or final notice of violation as provided under Section 3 301. All complaints shall be classified as an invalid report , a valid report , or an undetermined report . For any complaint classified as a valid report , the Department must determine within 30 working days if any rule or provision of this Act has been or is being violated. d 1 The Department shall, whenever possible, combine an on site investigation of a complaint in a facility with other inspections in order to avoid duplication of inspections. e In all cases, the Department shall inform the complainant of its findings within 10 days of its determination unless otherwise indicated by the complainant, and the complainant may direct the Department to send a copy of such findings to another person. The Department s findings may include comments or documentation provided by either the complainant or the licensee pertaining to the complaint. The HB0559 Enrolled LRB103 04144 BMS 49150 b Public Act 103 0001  Department shall also notify the facility of such findings within 10 days of the determination, but the name of the complainant or residents shall not be disclosed in this notice to the facility. The notice of such findings shall include a copy of the written determination the correction order, if any the warning notice, if any the inspection report or the State licensure form on which the violation is listed. f A written determination, correction order, or warning notice concerning a complaint, together with the facility s response, shall be available for public inspection, but the name of the complainant or resident shall not be disclosed without his or her consent. g A complainant who is dissatisfied with the determination or investigation by the Department may request a hearing under Section 3 703. The facility shall be given notice of any such hearing and may participate in the hearing as a party. If a facility requests a hearing under Section 3 703 which concerns a matter covered by a complaint, the complainant shall be given notice and may participate in the hearing as a party. A request for a hearing by either a complainant or a facility shall be submitted in writing to the Department within 30 days after the mailing of the Department s findings as described in subsection e of this Section. Upon receipt of the request the Department shall conduct a hearing as provided under Section 3 703. g 5 The Department shall conduct an annual review and HB0559 Enrolled LRB103 04144 BMS 49150 b Public Act 103 0001  make a report concerning the complaint process that includes the number of complaints received, the breakdown of anonymous and non anonymous complaints and whether the complaints were substantiated or not, the total number of substantiated complaints, and any other complaint information requested by the DD Facility Advisory Board. This report shall be provided to the DD Facility Advisory Board. The DD Facility Advisory Board shall review the report and suggest any changes deemed necessary to the Department for review and action, including how to investigate and substantiate anonymous complaints. h Any person who knowingly transmits a false report to the Department commits the offense of disorderly conduct under subsection a 8 of Section 26 1 of the Criminal Code of 2012. Source P.A. 99 180, eff. 7 29 15. Section 25. The ID DD Community Care Act is amended by changing Sections 3 116, 3 206, and 3 702 as follows 210 ILCS 47 3 116 Sec. 3 116. Probationary license. If the applicant has not been previously licensed or if the facility is not in operation at the time application is made, the Department shall issue only a probationary license. A probationary license shall be valid for 120 days unless sooner suspended or revoked under Section 3 119. Within 30 days prior to the HB0559 Enrolled LRB103 04144 BMS 49150 b Public Act 103 0001  termination of a probationary license, the Department shall fully and completely inspect the facility and, if the facility meets the applicable requirements for licensure, shall issue a license under Section 3 109 except that, during a statewide public health emergency, as defined in the Illinois Emergency Management Agency Act, the Department shall inspect facilities within an appropriate time frame to the extent feasible. If the Department finds that the facility does not meet the requirements for licensure but has made substantial progress toward meeting those requirements, the license may be renewed once for a period not to exceed 120 days from the expiration date of the initial probationary license. Source P.A. 96 339, eff. 7 1 10. 210 ILCS 47 3 206 Sec. 3 206. Curriculum for training nursing assistants and aides. The Department shall prescribe a curriculum for training nursing assistants, habilitation aides, and child care aides. a No person, except a volunteer who receives no compensation from a facility and is not included for the purpose of meeting any staffing requirements set forth by the Department, shall act as a nursing assistant, habilitation aide, or child care aide in a facility, nor shall any person, under any other title, not licensed, certified, or registered to render medical care by the Department of Financial and HB0559 Enrolled LRB103 04144 BMS 49150 b Public Act 103 0001  Professional Regulation, assist with the personal, medical, or nursing care of residents in a facility, unless such person meets the following requirements 1 Be at least 16 years of age, of temperate habits and good moral character, honest, reliable and trustworthy. 2 Be able to speak and understand the English language or a language understood by a substantial percentage of the facility s residents. 3 Provide evidence of employment or occupation, if any, and residence for 2 years prior to his or her present employment. 4 Have completed at least 8 years of grade school or provide proof of equivalent knowledge. 5 Begin a current course of training for nursing assistants, habilitation aides, or child care aides, approved by the Department, within 45 days of initial employment in the capacity of a nursing assistant, habilitation aide, or child care aide at any facility. Such courses of training shall be successfully completed within 120 days of initial employment in the capacity of nursing assistant, habilitation aide, or child care aide at a facility, except that, during a statewide public health emergency, as defined in the Illinois Emergency Management Agency Act, training shall be completed to the extent feasible. Nursing assistants, habilitation aides, HB0559 Enrolled LRB103 04144 BMS 49150 b Public Act 103 0001  and child care aides who are enrolled in approved courses in community colleges or other educational institutions on a term, semester or trimester basis, shall be exempt from the 120 day completion time limit. The Department shall adopt rules for such courses of training. These rules shall include procedures for facilities to carry on an approved course of training within the facility. The Department may accept comparable training in lieu of the 120 hour course for student nurses, foreign nurses, military personnel, or employees of the Department of Human Services. The facility shall develop and implement procedures, which shall be approved by the Department, for an ongoing review process, which shall take place within the facility, for nursing assistants, habilitation aides, and child care aides. At the time of each regularly scheduled licensure survey, or at the time of a complaint investigation, the Department may require any nursing assistant, habilitation aide, or child care aide to demonstrate, either through written examination or action, or both, sufficient knowledge in all areas of required training. If such knowledge is inadequate the Department shall require the nursing assistant, habilitation aide, or child care aide to complete inservice training and review in the facility until the nursing assistant, habilitation aide, or child HB0559 Enrolled LRB103 04144 BMS 49150 b Public Act 103 0001  care aide demonstrates to the Department, either through written examination or action, or both, sufficient knowledge in all areas of required training and 6 Be familiar with and have general skills related to resident care. a 0.5 An educational entity, other than a secondary school, conducting a nursing assistant, habilitation aide, or child care aide training program shall initiate a criminal history record check in accordance with the Health Care Worker Background Check Act prior to entry of an individual into the training program. A secondary school may initiate a criminal history record check in accordance with the Health Care Worker Background Check Act at any time during or after a training program. a 1 Nursing assistants, habilitation aides, or child care aides seeking to be included on the Health Care Worker Registry under the Health Care Worker Background Check Act must authorize the Department of Public Health or its designee to request a criminal history record check in accordance with the Health Care Worker Background Check Act and submit all necessary information. An individual may not newly be included on the Health Care Worker Registry unless a criminal history record check has been conducted with respect to the individual. b Persons subject to this Section shall perform their duties under the supervision of a licensed nurse or other HB0559 Enrolled LRB103 04144 BMS 49150 b Public Act 103 0001  appropriately trained, licensed, or certified personnel. c It is unlawful for any facility to employ any person in the capacity of nursing assistant, habilitation aide, or child care aide, or under any other title, not licensed by the State of Illinois to assist in the personal, medical, or nursing care of residents in such facility unless such person has complied with this Section. d Proof of compliance by each employee with the requirements set out in this Section shall be maintained for each such employee by each facility in the individual personnel folder of the employee. Proof of training shall be obtained only from the Health Care Worker Registry. e Each facility shall obtain access to the Health Care Worker Registry s web application, maintain the employment and demographic information relating to each employee, and verify by the category and type of employment that each employee subject to this Section meets all the requirements of this Section. f Any facility that is operated under Section 3 803 shall be exempt from the requirements of this Section. g Each skilled nursing and intermediate care facility that admits persons who are diagnosed as having Alzheimer s disease or related dementias shall require all nursing assistants, habilitation aides, or child care aides, who did not receive 12 hours of training in the care and treatment of such residents during the training required under paragraph HB0559 Enrolled LRB103 04144 BMS 49150 b Public Act 103 0001   5 of subsection a , to obtain 12 hours of in house training in the care and treatment of such residents. If the facility does not provide the training in house, the training shall be obtained from other facilities, community colleges or other educational institutions that have a recognized course for such training. The Department shall, by rule, establish a recognized course for such training. The Department s rules shall provide that such training may be conducted in house at each facility subject to the requirements of this subsection, in which case such training shall be monitored by the Department. The Department s rules shall also provide for circumstances and procedures whereby any person who has received training that meets the requirements of this subsection shall not be required to undergo additional training if he or she is transferred to or obtains employment at a different facility or a facility other than those licensed under this Act but remains continuously employed as a nursing assistant, habilitation aide, or child care aide. Individuals who have performed no nursing, nursing related services, or habilitation services for a period of 24 consecutive months shall be listed as inactive and as such do not meet the requirements of this Section. Licensed sheltered care facilities shall be exempt from the requirements of this Section. Source P.A. 100 432, eff. 8 25 17. HB0559 Enrolled LRB103 04144 BMS 49150 b Public Act 103 0001   210 ILCS 47 3 702 Sec. 3 702. Request for investigation of violation. a A person who believes that this Act or a rule promulgated under this Act may have been violated may request an investigation. The request may be submitted to the Department in writing, by telephone, by electronic means, or by personal visit. An oral complaint shall be reduced to writing by the Department. The Department shall make available, through its website and upon request, information regarding the oral and phone intake processes and the list of questions that will be asked of the complainant. The Department shall request information identifying the complainant, including the name, address and telephone number, to help enable appropriate follow up. The Department shall act on such complaints via on site visits or other methods deemed appropriate to handle the complaints with or without such identifying information, as otherwise provided under this Section. The complainant shall be informed that compliance with such request is not required to satisfy the procedures for filing a complaint under this Act. The Department must notify complainants that complaints with less information provided are far more difficult to respond to and investigate. b The substance of the complaint shall be provided in writing to the licensee, owner or administrator no earlier than at the commencement of an on site inspection of the facility which takes place pursuant to the complaint. HB0559 Enrolled LRB103 04144 BMS 49150 b Public Act 103 0001   c The Department shall not disclose the name of the complainant unless the complainant consents in writing to the disclosure or the investigation results in a judicial proceeding, or unless disclosure is essential to the investigation. The complainant shall be given the opportunity to withdraw the complaint before disclosure. Upon the request of the complainant, the Department may permit the complainant or a representative of the complainant to accompany the person making the on site inspection of the facility. d Upon receipt of a complaint, the Department shall determine whether this Act or a rule promulgated under this Act has been or is being violated. The Department shall investigate all complaints alleging abuse or neglect within 7 days after the receipt of the complaint except that complaints of abuse or neglect which indicate that a resident s life or safety is in imminent danger shall be investigated within 24 hours after receipt of the complaint. All other complaints shall be investigated within 30 days after the receipt of the complaint, except that, during a statewide public health emergency, as defined in the Illinois Emergency Management Agency Act, all other complaints shall be investigated within an appropriate time frame to the extent feasible. The Department employees investigating a complaint shall conduct a brief, informal exit conference with the facility to alert its administration of any suspected serious deficiency that poses a direct threat to the health, safety or welfare of a resident HB0559 Enrolled LRB103 04144 BMS 49150 b Public Act 103 0001  to enable an immediate correction for the alleviation or elimination of such threat. Such information and findings discussed in the brief exit conference shall become a part of the investigating record but shall not in any way constitute an official or final notice of violation as provided under Section 3 301. All complaints shall be classified as an invalid report , a valid report , or an undetermined report . For any complaint classified as a valid report , the Department must determine within 30 working days if any rule or provision of this Act has been or is being violated. d 1 The Department shall, whenever possible, combine an on site investigation of a complaint in a facility with other inspections in order to avoid duplication of inspections. e In all cases, the Department shall inform the complainant of its findings within 10 days of its determination unless otherwise indicated by the complainant, and the complainant may direct the Department to send a copy of such findings to another person. The Department s findings may include comments or documentation provided by either the complainant or the licensee pertaining to the complaint. The Department shall also notify the facility of such findings within 10 days of the determination, but the name of the complainant or residents shall not be disclosed in this notice to the facility. The notice of such findings shall include a copy of the written determination the correction order, if any the warning notice, if any the inspection report or the HB0559 Enrolled LRB103 04144 BMS 49150 b Public Act 103 0001  State licensure form on which the violation is listed. f A written determination, correction order, or warning notice concerning a complaint, together with the facility s response, shall be available for public inspection, but the name of the complainant or resident shall not be disclosed without his or her consent. g A complainant who is dissatisfied with the determination or investigation by the Department may request a hearing under Section 3 703. The facility shall be given notice of any such hearing and may participate in the hearing as a party. If a facility requests a hearing under Section 3 703 which concerns a matter covered by a complaint, the complainant shall be given notice and may participate in the hearing as a party. A request for a hearing by either a complainant or a facility shall be submitted in writing to the Department within 30 days after the mailing of the Department s findings as described in subsection e of this Section. Upon receipt of the request the Department shall conduct a hearing as provided under Section 3 703. g 5 The Department shall conduct an annual review and make a report concerning the complaint process that includes the number of complaints received, the breakdown of anonymous and non anonymous complaints and whether the complaints were substantiated or not, the total number of substantiated complaints, and any other complaint information requested by the DD Facility Advisory Board. This report shall be provided HB0559 Enrolled LRB103 04144 BMS 49150 b Public Act 103 0001  to the DD Facility Advisory Board. The DD Facility Advisory Board shall review the report and suggest any changes deemed necessary to the Department for review and action, including how to investigate and substantiate anonymous complaints. h Any person who knowingly transmits a false report to the Department commits the offense of disorderly conduct under subsection a 8 of Section 26 1 of the Criminal Code of 2012. Source P.A. 97 1150, eff. 1 25 13 98 988, eff. 8 18 14. Section 30. The Specialized Mental Health Rehabilitation Act of 2013 is amended by changing Section 4 105 as follows 210 ILCS 49 4 105 Sec. 4 105. Provisional licensure duration. A provisional license shall be valid upon fulfilling the requirements established by the Department by emergency rule. The license shall remain valid as long as a facility remains in compliance with the licensure provisions established in rule. Provisional licenses issued upon initial licensure as a specialized mental health rehabilitation facility shall expire at the end of a 3 year period, which commences on the date the provisional license is issued. Issuance of a provisional license for any reason other than initial licensure including, but not limited to, change of ownership, location, number of beds, or services shall not extend the maximum 3 year period, at the HB0559 Enrolled LRB103 04144 BMS 49150 b Public Act 103 0001  end of which a facility must be licensed pursuant to Section 4 201. An extension for 120 days may be granted if requested and approved by the Department. Notwithstanding any other provision of this Act or the Specialized Mental Health Rehabilitation Facilities Code, 77 Ill. Adm. Admin. Code 380, to the contrary, if a facility has received notice from the Department that its application for provisional licensure to provide recovery and rehabilitation services has been accepted as complete and the facility has attested in writing to the Department that it will comply with the staff training plan approved by the Division of Mental Health, then a provisional license for recovery and rehabilitation services shall be issued to the facility within 60 days after the Department determines that the facility is in compliance with the requirements of the Life Safety Code in accordance with Section 4 104.5 of this Act. Source P.A. 99 712, eff. 8 5 16 100 365, eff. 8 25 17 revised 2 28 22. Section 35. The Illinois Insurance Code is amended by adding Section 356z.61 as follows 215 ILCS 5 356z.61 new Sec. 356z.61. Coverage of pharmacy testing, screening, vaccinations, and treatment. A group or individual policy of accident and health HB0559 Enrolled LRB103 04144 BMS 49150 b Public Act 103 0001  insurance or a managed care plan that is amended, delivered, issued, or renewed on or after January 1, 2025 shall provide coverage for health care or patient care services provided by a pharmacist if 1 the pharmacist meets the requirements and scope of practice described in paragraph 15 , 16 , or 17 of subsection d of Section 3 of the Pharmacy Practice Act 2 the health plan provides coverage for the same service provided by a licensed physician, an advanced practice registered nurse, or a physician assistant 3 the pharmacist is included in the health benefit plan s network of participating providers and 4 reimbursement has been successfully negotiated in good faith between the pharmacist and the health plan. Section 45. The Medical Practice Act of 1987 is amended by changing Sections 2 and 54.2 as follows 225 ILCS 60 2 from Ch. 111, par. 4400 2 Section scheduled to be repealed on January 1, 2027 Sec. 2. Definitions. For purposes of this Act, the following definitions shall have the following meanings, except where the context requires otherwise Act means the Medical Practice Act of 1987. Address of record means the designated address recorded by the Department in the applicant s or licensee s application HB0559 Enrolled LRB103 04144 BMS 49150 b Public Act 103 0001  file or license file as maintained by the Department s licensure maintenance unit. Chiropractic physician means a person licensed to treat human ailments without the use of drugs and without operative surgery. Nothing in this Act shall be construed to prohibit a chiropractic physician from providing advice regarding the use of non prescription products or from administering atmospheric oxygen. Nothing in this Act shall be construed to authorize a chiropractic physician to prescribe drugs. Department means the Department of Financial and Professional Regulation. Disciplinary action means revocation, suspension, probation, supervision, practice modification, reprimand, required education, fines or any other action taken by the Department against a person holding a license. Email address of record means the designated email address recorded by the Department in the applicant s application file or the licensee s license file, as maintained by the Department s licensure maintenance unit. Final determination means the governing body s final action taken under the procedure followed by a health care institution, or professional association or society, against any person licensed under the Act in accordance with the bylaws or rules and regulations of such health care institution, or professional association or society. Fund means the Illinois State Medical Disciplinary Fund. HB0559 Enrolled LRB103 04144 BMS 49150 b Public Act 103 0001   Impaired means the inability to practice medicine with reasonable skill and safety due to physical or mental disabilities as evidenced by a written determination or written consent based on clinical evidence including deterioration through the aging process or loss of motor skill, or abuse of drugs or alcohol, of sufficient degree to diminish a person s ability to deliver competent patient care. International medical graduate means a medical graduate i who has been trained in a country other than the United States ii whose education has been certified by the Educational Commission for Foreign Medical Graduates iii who has passed Step 1, Step 2 Clinical Knowledge, and Step 3 of the United States Medical Licensing Examination as required by this Act iv who maintains an unencumbered license from another country and v who is not licensed to practice medicine in any state or territory of the United States. Medical Board means the Illinois State Medical Board. Physician means a person licensed under the Medical Practice Act to practice medicine in all of its branches or a chiropractic physician. Professional association means an association or society of persons licensed under this Act, and operating within the State of Illinois, including but not limited to, medical societies, osteopathic organizations, and chiropractic organizations, but this term shall not be deemed to include hospital medical staffs. HB0559 Enrolled LRB103 04144 BMS 49150 b Public Act 103 0001   Program of care, counseling, or treatment means a written schedule of organized treatment, care, counseling, activities, or education, satisfactory to the Medical Board, designed for the purpose of restoring an impaired person to a condition whereby the impaired person can practice medicine with reasonable skill and safety of a sufficient degree to deliver competent patient care. Reinstate means to change the status of a license or permit from inactive or nonrenewed status to active status. Restore means to remove an encumbrance from a license due to probation, suspension, or revocation. Secretary means the Secretary of Financial and Professional Regulation. Source P.A. 102 20, eff. 1 1 22 102 1117, eff. 1 13 23. 225 ILCS 60 54.2 Section scheduled to be repealed on January 1, 2027 Sec. 54.2. Physician delegation of authority. a Nothing in this Act shall be construed to limit the delegation of patient care tasks or duties by a physician, to a licensed practical nurse, a registered professional nurse, or other licensed person practicing within the scope of his or her individual licensing Act. Delegation by a physician licensed to practice medicine in all its branches to physician assistants or advanced practice registered nurses is also addressed in Section 54.5 of this Act. No physician may HB0559 Enrolled LRB103 04144 BMS 49150 b Public Act 103 0001  delegate any patient care task or duty that is statutorily or by rule mandated to be performed by a physician. b In an office or practice setting and within a physician patient relationship, a physician may delegate patient care tasks or duties to an unlicensed person who possesses appropriate training and experience provided a health care professional, who is practicing within the scope of such licensed professional s individual licensing Act, is on site to provide assistance. c Any such patient care task or duty delegated to a licensed or unlicensed person must be within the scope of practice, education, training, or experience of the delegating physician and within the context of a physician patient relationship. d Nothing in this Section shall be construed to affect referrals for professional services required by law. e The Department shall have the authority to promulgate rules concerning a physician s delegation, including but not limited to, the use of light emitting devices for patient care or treatment. f Nothing in this Act shall be construed to limit the method of delegation that may be authorized by any means, including, but not limited to, oral, written, electronic, standing orders, protocols, guidelines, or verbal orders. g A physician licensed to practice medicine in all of its branches under this Act may delegate any and all authority HB0559 Enrolled LRB103 04144 BMS 49150 b Public Act 103 0001  prescribed to him or her by law to international medical graduate physicians, so long as the tasks or duties are within the scope of practice, education, training, or experience of the delegating physician who is on site to provide assistance. An international medical graduate working in Illinois pursuant to this subsection is subject to all statutory and regulatory requirements of this Act, as applicable, relating to the standards of care. An international medical graduate physician is limited to providing treatment under the supervision of a physician licensed to practice medicine in all of its branches. The supervising physician or employer must keep record of and make available upon request by the Department the following 1 evidence of education certified by the Educational Commission for Foreign Medical Graduates 2 evidence of passage of Step 1, Step 2 Clinical Knowledge, and Step 3 of the United States Medical Licensing Examination as required by this Act and 3 evidence of an unencumbered license from another country. This subsection does not apply to any international medical graduate whose license as a physician is revoked, suspended, or otherwise encumbered. Source P.A. 100 513, eff. 1 1 18. Section 50. The Pharmacy Practice Act is amended by changing Section 3 and by adding Section 9.6 as follows 225 ILCS 85 3 HB0559 Enrolled LRB103 04144 BMS 49150 b Public Act 103 0001   Section scheduled to be repealed on January 1, 2028 Sec. 3. Definitions. For the purpose of this Act, except where otherwise limited therein a Pharmacy or drugstore means and includes every store, shop, pharmacy department, or other place where pharmacist care is provided by a pharmacist 1 where drugs, medicines, or poisons are dispensed, sold or offered for sale at retail, or displayed for sale at retail or 2 where prescriptions of physicians, dentists, advanced practice registered nurses, physician assistants, veterinarians, podiatric physicians, or optometrists, within the limits of their licenses, are compounded, filled, or dispensed or 3 which has upon it or displayed within it, or affixed to or used in connection with it, a sign bearing the word or words Pharmacist , Druggist , Pharmacy , Pharmaceutical Care , Apothecary , Drugstore , Medicine Store , Prescriptions , Drugs , Dispensary , Medicines , or any word or words of similar or like import, either in the English language or any other language or 4 where the characteristic prescription sign Rx or similar design is exhibited or 5 any store, or shop, or other place with respect to which any of the above words, objects, signs or designs are used in any advertisement. b Drugs means and includes 1 articles recognized in the official United States Pharmacopoeia National Formulary USP NF , or any supplement thereto and being intended for and HB0559 Enrolled LRB103 04144 BMS 49150 b Public Act 103 0001  having for their main use the diagnosis, cure, mitigation, treatment or prevention of disease in man or other animals, as approved by the United States Food and Drug Administration, but does not include devices or their components, parts, or accessories and 2 all other articles intended for and having for their main use the diagnosis, cure, mitigation, treatment or prevention of disease in man or other animals, as approved by the United States Food and Drug Administration, but does not include devices or their components, parts, or accessories and 3 articles other than food having for their main use and intended to affect the structure or any function of the body of man or other animals and 4 articles having for their main use and intended for use as a component or any articles specified in clause 1 , 2 or 3 but does not include devices or their components, parts or accessories. c Medicines means and includes all drugs intended for human or veterinary use approved by the United States Food and Drug Administration. d Practice of pharmacy means 1 the interpretation and the provision of assistance in the monitoring, evaluation, and implementation of prescription drug orders 2 the dispensing of prescription drug orders 3 participation in drug and device selection 4 drug administration limited to the administration of oral, topical, injectable, and inhalation as follows HB0559 Enrolled LRB103 04144 BMS 49150 b Public Act 103 0001   A in the context of patient education on the proper use or delivery of medications B vaccination of patients 7 years of age and older pursuant to a valid prescription or standing order, by a physician licensed to practice medicine in all its branches, except for vaccinations covered by paragraph 15 , upon completion of appropriate training, including how to address contraindications and adverse reactions set forth by rule, with notification to the patient s physician and appropriate record retention, or pursuant to hospital pharmacy and therapeutics committee policies and procedures. Eligible vaccines are those listed on the U.S. Centers for Disease Control and Prevention CDC Recommended Immunization Schedule, the CDC s Health Information for International Travel, or the U.S. Food and Drug Administration s Vaccines Licensed and Authorized for Use in the United States. As applicable to the State s Medicaid program and other payers, vaccines ordered and administered in accordance with this subsection shall be covered and reimbursed at no less than the rate that the vaccine is reimbursed when ordered and administered by a physician B 5 following the initial administration of long acting or extended release form opioid antagonists by a physician licensed to practice HB0559 Enrolled LRB103 04144 BMS 49150 b Public Act 103 0001  medicine in all its branches, administration of injections of long acting or extended release form opioid antagonists for the treatment of substance use disorder, pursuant to a valid prescription by a physician licensed to practice medicine in all its branches, upon completion of appropriate training, including how to address contraindications and adverse reactions, including, but not limited to, respiratory depression and the performance of cardiopulmonary resuscitation, set forth by rule, with notification to the patient s physician and appropriate record retention, or pursuant to hospital pharmacy and therapeutics committee policies and procedures C administration of injections of alpha hydroxyprogesterone caproate, pursuant to a valid prescription, by a physician licensed to practice medicine in all its branches, upon completion of appropriate training, including how to address contraindications and adverse reactions set forth by rule, with notification to the patient s physician and appropriate record retention, or pursuant to hospital pharmacy and therapeutics committee policies and procedures and D administration of injections of long term antipsychotic medications pursuant to a valid prescription by a physician licensed to practice HB0559 Enrolled LRB103 04144 BMS 49150 b Public Act 103 0001  medicine in all its branches, upon completion of appropriate training conducted by an Accreditation Council of Pharmaceutical Education accredited provider, including how to address contraindications and adverse reactions set forth by rule, with notification to the patient s physician and appropriate record retention, or pursuant to hospital pharmacy and therapeutics committee policies and procedures. 5 blank 6 drug regimen review 7 drug or drug related research 8 the provision of patient counseling 9 the practice of telepharmacy 10 the provision of those acts or services necessary to provide pharmacist care 11 medication therapy management 12 the responsibility for compounding and labeling of drugs and devices except labeling by a manufacturer, repackager, or distributor of non prescription drugs and commercially packaged legend drugs and devices , proper and safe storage of drugs and devices, and maintenance of required records 13 the assessment and consultation of patients and dispensing of hormonal contraceptives and 14 the initiation, dispensing, or administration of HB0559 Enrolled LRB103 04144 BMS 49150 b Public Act 103 0001  drugs, laboratory tests, assessments, referrals, and consultations for human immunodeficiency virus pre exposure prophylaxis and human immunodeficiency virus post exposure prophylaxis under Section 43.5 . 15 vaccination of patients 7 years of age and older for COVID 19 or influenza subcutaneously, intramuscularly, or orally as authorized, approved, or licensed by the United States Food and Drug Administration, pursuant to the following conditions A the vaccine must be authorized or licensed by the United States Food and Drug Administration B the vaccine must be ordered and administered according to the Advisory Committee on Immunization Practices standard immunization schedule C the pharmacist must complete a course of training accredited by the Accreditation Council on Pharmacy Education or a similar health authority or professional body approved by the Division of Professional Regulation D the pharmacist must have a current certificate in basic cardiopulmonary resuscitation E the pharmacist must complete, during each State licensing period, a minimum of 2 hours of immunization related continuing pharmacy education approved by the Accreditation Council on Pharmacy Education HB0559 Enrolled LRB103 04144 BMS 49150 b Public Act 103 0001   F the pharmacist must comply with recordkeeping and reporting requirements of the jurisdiction in which the pharmacist administers vaccines, including informing the patient s primary care provider, when available, and complying with requirements whereby the person administering a vaccine must review the vaccine registry or other vaccination records prior to administering the vaccine and G the pharmacist must inform the pharmacist s patients who are less than 18 years old, as well as the adult caregiver accompanying the child, of the importance of a well child visit with a pediatrician or other licensed primary care provider and must refer patients as appropriate 16 the ordering and administration of COVID 19 therapeutics subcutaneously, intramuscularly, or orally with notification to the patient s physician and appropriate record retention or pursuant to hospital pharmacy and therapeutics committee policies and procedures. Eligible therapeutics are those approved, authorized, or licensed by the United States Food and Drug Administration and must be administered subcutaneously, intramuscularly, or orally in accordance with that approval, authorization, or licensing and 17 the ordering and administration of tests and screenings for i influenza, ii SARS COV 2, and iii HB0559 Enrolled LRB103 04144 BMS 49150 b Public Act 103 0001  health conditions identified by a statewide public health emergency, as defined in the Illinois Emergency Management Agency Act, with notification to the patient s physician and appropriate record retention or pursuant to hospital pharmacy and therapeutics committee policies and procedures. Eligible tests and screenings are those approved, authorized, or licensed by the United States Food and Drug Administration and must be administered in accordance with that approval, authorization, or licensing. A pharmacist who orders or administers tests or screenings for health conditions described in this paragraph may use a test that may guide clinical decision making for the health condition that is waived under the federal Clinical Laboratory Improvement Amendments of 1988 and regulations promulgated thereunder or any established screening procedure that is established under a statewide protocol. A pharmacist may delegate the administrative and technical tasks of performing a test for the health conditions described in this paragraph to a registered pharmacy technician or student pharmacist acting under the supervision of the pharmacist. A pharmacist who performs any of the acts defined as the practice of pharmacy in this State must be actively licensed as a pharmacist under this Act. HB0559 Enrolled LRB103 04144 BMS 49150 b Public Act 103 0001   e Prescription means and includes any written, oral, facsimile, or electronically transmitted order for drugs or medical devices, issued by a physician licensed to practice medicine in all its branches, dentist, veterinarian, podiatric physician, or optometrist, within the limits of his or her license, by a physician assistant in accordance with subsection f of Section 4, or by an advanced practice registered nurse in accordance with subsection g of Section 4, containing the following 1 name of the patient 2 date when prescription was issued 3 name and strength of drug or description of the medical device prescribed and 4 quantity 5 directions for use 6 prescriber s name, address, and signature and 7 DEA registration number where required, for controlled substances. The prescription may, but is not required to, list the illness, disease, or condition for which the drug or device is being prescribed. DEA registration numbers shall not be required on inpatient drug orders. A prescription for medication other than controlled substances shall be valid for up to 15 months from the date issued for the purpose of refills, unless the prescription states otherwise. f Person means and includes a natural person, partnership, association, corporation, government entity, or any other legal entity. g Department means the Department of Financial and Professional Regulation. HB0559 Enrolled LRB103 04144 BMS 49150 b Public Act 103 0001   h Board of Pharmacy or Board means the State Board of Pharmacy of the Department of Financial and Professional Regulation. i Secretary means the Secretary of Financial and Professional Regulation. j Drug product selection means the interchange for a prescribed pharmaceutical product in accordance with Section 25 of this Act and Section 3.14 of the Illinois Food, Drug and Cosmetic Act. k Inpatient drug order means an order issued by an authorized prescriber for a resident or patient of a facility licensed under the Nursing Home Care Act, the ID DD Community Care Act, the MC DD Act, the Specialized Mental Health Rehabilitation Act of 2013, the Hospital Licensing Act, or the University of Illinois Hospital Act, or a facility which is operated by the Department of Human Services as successor to the Department of Mental Health and Developmental Disabilities or the Department of Corrections. k 5 Pharmacist means an individual health care professional and provider currently licensed by this State to engage in the practice of pharmacy. l Pharmacist in charge means the licensed pharmacist whose name appears on a pharmacy license and who is responsible for all aspects of the operation related to the practice of pharmacy. m Dispense or dispensing means the interpretation, HB0559 Enrolled LRB103 04144 BMS 49150 b Public Act 103 0001  evaluation, and implementation of a prescription drug order, including the preparation and delivery of a drug or device to a patient or patient s agent in a suitable container appropriately labeled for subsequent administration to or use by a patient in accordance with applicable State and federal laws and regulations. Dispense or dispensing does not mean the physical delivery to a patient or a patient s representative in a home or institution by a designee of a pharmacist or by common carrier. Dispense or dispensing also does not mean the physical delivery of a drug or medical device to a patient or patient s representative by a pharmacist s designee within a pharmacy or drugstore while the pharmacist is on duty and the pharmacy is open. n Nonresident pharmacy means a pharmacy that is located in a state, commonwealth, or territory of the United States, other than Illinois, that delivers, dispenses, or distributes, through the United States Postal Service, commercially acceptable parcel delivery service, or other common carrier, to Illinois residents, any substance which requires a prescription. o Compounding means the preparation and mixing of components, excluding flavorings, 1 as the result of a prescriber s prescription drug order or initiative based on the prescriber patient pharmacist relationship in the course of professional practice or 2 for the purpose of, or incident to, research, teaching, or chemical analysis and not HB0559 Enrolled LRB103 04144 BMS 49150 b Public Act 103 0001  for sale or dispensing. Compounding includes the preparation of drugs or devices in anticipation of receiving prescription drug orders based on routine, regularly observed dispensing patterns. Commercially available products may be compounded for dispensing to individual patients only if all of the following conditions are met i the commercial product is not reasonably available from normal distribution channels in a timely manner to meet the patient s needs and ii the prescribing practitioner has requested that the drug be compounded. p Blank . q Blank . r Patient counseling means the communication between a pharmacist or a student pharmacist under the supervision of a pharmacist and a patient or the patient s representative about the patient s medication or device for the purpose of optimizing proper use of prescription medications or devices. Patient counseling may include without limitation 1 obtaining a medication history 2 acquiring a patient s allergies and health conditions 3 facilitation of the patient s understanding of the intended use of the medication 4 proper directions for use 5 significant potential adverse events 6 potential food drug interactions and 7 the need to be compliant with the medication therapy. A pharmacy technician may only participate in the following aspects of patient counseling under the supervision of a HB0559 Enrolled LRB103 04144 BMS 49150 b Public Act 103 0001  pharmacist 1 obtaining medication history 2 providing the offer for counseling by a pharmacist or student pharmacist and 3 acquiring a patient s allergies and health conditions. s Patient profiles or patient drug therapy record means the obtaining, recording, and maintenance of patient prescription information, including prescriptions for controlled substances, and personal information. t Blank . u Medical device or device means an instrument, apparatus, implement, machine, contrivance, implant, in vitro reagent, or other similar or related article, including any component part or accessory, required under federal law to bear the label Caution Federal law requires dispensing by or on the order of a physician . A seller of goods and services who, only for the purpose of retail sales, compounds, sells, rents, or leases medical devices shall not, by reasons thereof, be required to be a licensed pharmacy. v Unique identifier means an electronic signature, handwritten signature or initials, thumb print, or other acceptable biometric or electronic identification process as approved by the Department. w Current usual and customary retail price means the price that a pharmacy charges to a non third party payor. x Automated pharmacy system means a mechanical system located within the confines of the pharmacy or remote location HB0559 Enrolled LRB103 04144 BMS 49150 b Public Act 103 0001  that performs operations or activities, other than compounding or administration, relative to storage, packaging, dispensing, or distribution of medication, and which collects, controls, and maintains all transaction information. y Drug regimen review means and includes the evaluation of prescription drug orders and patient records for 1 known allergies 2 drug or potential therapy contraindications 3 reasonable dose, duration of use, and route of administration, taking into consideration factors such as age, gender, and contraindications 4 reasonable directions for use 5 potential or actual adverse drug reactions 6 drug drug interactions 7 drug food interactions 8 drug disease contraindications 9 therapeutic duplication 10 patient laboratory values when authorized and available 11 proper utilization including over or under utilization and optimum therapeutic outcomes and 12 abuse and misuse. z Electronically transmitted prescription means a prescription that is created, recorded, or stored by electronic means issued and validated with an electronic signature and transmitted by electronic means directly from the prescriber to a pharmacy. An electronic prescription is not an image of a physical prescription that is transferred by electronic means from computer to computer, facsimile to facsimile, or facsimile to computer. aa Medication therapy management services means a HB0559 Enrolled LRB103 04144 BMS 49150 b Public Act 103 0001  distinct service or group of services offered by licensed pharmacists, physicians licensed to practice medicine in all its branches, advanced practice registered nurses authorized in a written agreement with a physician licensed to practice medicine in all its branches, or physician assistants authorized in guidelines by a supervising physician that optimize therapeutic outcomes for individual patients through improved medication use. In a retail or other non hospital pharmacy, medication therapy management services shall consist of the evaluation of prescription drug orders and patient medication records to resolve conflicts with the following 1 known allergies 2 drug or potential therapy contraindications 3 reasonable dose, duration of use, and route of administration, taking into consideration factors such as age, gender, and contraindications 4 reasonable directions for use 5 potential or actual adverse drug reactions 6 drug drug interactions 7 drug food interactions 8 drug disease contraindications 9 identification of therapeutic duplication 10 patient laboratory values when authorized and available 11 proper utilization including over or under utilization and optimum therapeutic outcomes and HB0559 Enrolled LRB103 04144 BMS 49150 b Public Act 103 0001   12 drug abuse and misuse. Medication therapy management services includes the following 1 documenting the services delivered and communicating the information provided to patients prescribers within an appropriate time frame, not to exceed 48 hours 2 providing patient counseling designed to enhance a patient s understanding and the appropriate use of his or her medications and 3 providing information, support services, and resources designed to enhance a patient s adherence with his or her prescribed therapeutic regimens. Medication therapy management services may also include patient care functions authorized by a physician licensed to practice medicine in all its branches for his or her identified patient or groups of patients under specified conditions or limitations in a standing order from the physician. Medication therapy management services in a licensed hospital may also include the following 1 reviewing assessments of the patient s health status and 2 following protocols of a hospital pharmacy and therapeutics committee with respect to the fulfillment of medication orders. HB0559 Enrolled LRB103 04144 BMS 49150 b Public Act 103 0001   bb Pharmacist care means the provision by a pharmacist of medication therapy management services, with or without the dispensing of drugs or devices, intended to achieve outcomes that improve patient health, quality of life, and comfort and enhance patient safety. cc Protected health information means individually identifiable health information that, except as otherwise provided, is 1 transmitted by electronic media 2 maintained in any medium set forth in the definition of electronic media in the federal Health Insurance Portability and Accountability Act or 3 transmitted or maintained in any other form or medium. Protected health information does not include individually identifiable health information found in 1 education records covered by the federal Family Educational Right and Privacy Act or 2 employment records held by a licensee in its role as an employer. dd Standing order means a specific order for a patient or group of patients issued by a physician licensed to practice medicine in all its branches in Illinois. ee Address of record means the designated address recorded by the Department in the applicant s application file or licensee s license file maintained by the Department s HB0559 Enrolled LRB103 04144 BMS 49150 b Public Act 103 0001  licensure maintenance unit. ff Home pharmacy means the location of a pharmacy s primary operations. gg Email address of record means the designated email address recorded by the Department in the applicant s application file or the licensee s license file, as maintained by the Department s licensure maintenance unit. Source P.A. 101 349, eff. 1 1 20 102 16, eff. 6 17 21 102 103, eff. 1 1 22 102 558, eff. 8 20 21 102 813, eff. 5 13 22 102 1051, eff. 1 1 23. 225 ILCS 85 9.6 new Sec. 9.6. Administration of vaccines and therapeutics by registered pharmacy technicians and student pharmacists. a Under the supervision of an appropriately trained pharmacist, a registered pharmacy technician or student pharmacist may administer COVID 19 and influenza vaccines subcutaneously, intramuscularly, or orally as authorized, approved, or licensed by the United States Food and Drug Administration, subject to the following conditions 1 the vaccination must be ordered by the supervising pharmacist 2 the supervising pharmacist must be readily and immediately available to the immunizing pharmacy technician or student pharmacist 3 the pharmacy technician or student pharmacist must HB0559 Enrolled LRB103 04144 BMS 49150 b Public Act 103 0001  complete a practical training program that is approved by the Accreditation Council for Pharmacy Education and that includes hands on injection technique training and training in the recognition and treatment of emergency reactions to vaccines 4 the pharmacy technician or student pharmacist must have a current certificate in basic cardiopulmonary resuscitation 5 the pharmacy technician or student pharmacist must complete, during the relevant licensing period, a minimum of 2 hours of immunization related continuing pharmacy education that is approved by the Accreditation Council for Pharmacy Education 6 the supervising pharmacist must comply with all relevant recordkeeping and reporting requirements 7 the supervising pharmacist must be responsible for complying with requirements related to reporting adverse events 8 the supervising pharmacist must review the vaccine registry or other vaccination records prior to ordering the vaccination to be administered by the pharmacy technician or student pharmacist 9 the pharmacy technician or student pharmacist must, if the patient is 18 years of age or younger, inform the patient and the adult caregiver accompanying the patient of the importance of a well child visit with a HB0559 Enrolled LRB103 04144 BMS 49150 b Public Act 103 0001  pediatrician or other licensed primary care provider and must refer patients as appropriate 10 in the case of a COVID 19 vaccine, the vaccination must be ordered and administered according to the Advisory Committee on Immunization Practices COVID 19 vaccine recommendations 11 in the case of a COVID 19 vaccine, the supervising pharmacist must comply with any applicable requirements or conditions of use as set forth in the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention COVID 19 vaccination provider agreement and any other federal requirements that apply to the administration of COVID 19 vaccines being administered and 12 the registered pharmacy technician or student pharmacist and the supervising pharmacist must comply with all other requirements of this Act and the rules adopted thereunder pertaining to the administration of drugs. b Under the supervision of an appropriately trained pharmacist, a registered pharmacy technician or student pharmacist may administer COVID 19 therapeutics subcutaneously, intramuscularly, or orally as authorized, approved, or licensed by the United States Food and Drug Administration, subject to the following conditions 1 the COVID 19 therapeutic must be authorized, approved or licensed by the United States Food and Drug Administration HB0559 Enrolled LRB103 04144 BMS 49150 b Public Act 103 0001   2 the COVID 19 therapeutic must be administered subcutaneously, intramuscularly, or orally in accordance with the United States Food and Drug Administration approval, authorization, or licensing 3 a pharmacy technician or student pharmacist practicing pursuant to this Section must complete a practical training program that is approved by the Accreditation Council for Pharmacy Education and that includes hands on injection technique training, clinical evaluation of indications and contraindications of COVID 19 therapeutics training, training in the recognition and treatment of emergency reactions to COVID 19 therapeutics, and any additional training required in the United States Food and Drug Administration approval, authorization, or licensing 4 the pharmacy technician or student pharmacist must have a current certificate in basic cardiopulmonary resuscitation 5 the pharmacy technician or student pharmacist must comply with any applicable requirements or conditions of use that apply to the administration of COVID 19 therapeutics 6 the supervising pharmacist must comply with all relevant recordkeeping and reporting requirements 7 the supervising pharmacist must be readily and immediately available to the pharmacy technician or HB0559 Enrolled LRB103 04144 BMS 49150 b Public Act 103 0001  student pharmacist and 8 the registered pharmacy technician or student pharmacist and the supervising pharmacist must comply with all other requirements of this Act and the rules adopted thereunder pertaining to the administration of drugs. Section 55. The Illinois Speech Language Pathology and Audiology Practice Act is amended by changing Section 8.8 as follows 225 ILCS 110 8.8 Section scheduled to be repealed on January 1, 2028 Sec. 8.8. Supervision of speech language pathology assistants. a A speech language pathology assistant shall practice only under the supervision of a speech language pathologist who has at least 2 years experience in addition to the supervised professional experience required under subsection f of Section 8 of this Act. A speech language pathologist who supervises a speech language pathology assistant i must have completed at least 6 clock hours of training in supervision related to speech language pathology, and ii must complete at least 2 clock hours of continuing education in supervision related to speech language pathology in each new licensing cycle after completion of the initial training required under item i . The Department shall promulgate rules HB0559 Enrolled LRB103 04144 BMS 49150 b Public Act 103 0001  describing the supervision training requirements. The rules may allow a speech language pathologist to apply to the Board for an exemption from this training requirement based upon prior supervisory experience. b A speech language pathology assistant must be under the direct supervision of a speech language pathologist at least 30 of the speech language pathology assistant s actual patient or client contact time per patient or client during the first 90 days of initial employment as a speech language pathology assistant. Thereafter, a speech language pathology assistant must be under the direct supervision of a speech language pathologist at least 20 of the speech language pathology assistant s actual patient or client contact time per patient or client. Supervision of a speech language pathology assistant beyond the minimum requirements of this subsection may be imposed at the discretion of the supervising speech language pathologist. A supervising speech language pathologist must be available to communicate with a speech language pathology assistant whenever the assistant is in contact with a patient or client. c A speech language pathologist that supervises a speech language pathology assistant must document direct supervision activities. At a minimum, supervision documentation must provide i information regarding the quality of the speech language pathology assistant s performance of assigned duties, and ii verification that HB0559 Enrolled LRB103 04144 BMS 49150 b Public Act 103 0001  clinical activity is limited to duties specified in Section 8.7. d A full time speech language pathologist may supervise no more than 2 speech language pathology assistants. A speech language pathologist that does not work full time may supervise no more than one speech language pathology assistant. e For purposes of this Section, direct supervision means on site, in view observation and guidance by a speech language pathologist while an assigned activity is performed by the speech language pathology assistant or supervision by a speech language pathologist by way of video conferencing technology during telehealth practice. Source P.A. 100 530, eff. 1 1 18. Section 65. The Radiation Protection Act of 1990 is amended by changing Section 7a as follows 420 ILCS 40 7a from Ch. 111 1 2, par. 210 7a Section scheduled to be repealed on January 1, 2027 Sec. 7a. Certification of industrial radiographers. a Beginning January 1, 1993, no person may perform industrial radiography unless he or she is certified by the Department of Nuclear Safety or its successor, the Illinois Emergency Management Agency, to perform industrial radiography. The Agency shall promulgate regulations HB0559 Enrolled LRB103 04144 BMS 49150 b Public Act 103 0001  establishing standards and procedures for certification of industrial radiographers. The regulations may include, without limitation, provisions specifying a minimum course of study and requiring that individuals seeking certification pass an examination administered or approved by the Agency. Industrial radiography certification shall be valid for 5 years, except that certifications for industrial radiography trainees shall be valid for 2 years or shall be extended pursuant to subsection e . The Agency shall establish by regulation standards and procedures for renewal of certification. The regulations shall provide that certification for industrial radiography trainees shall be nonrenewable. b The regulations of the Department of Nuclear Safety, as the predecessor agency of the Illinois Emergency Management Agency, shall provide for provisional certification of persons who performed industrial radiography before January 1, 1993. In order to obtain provisional certification, the industrial radiographer must apply to the Department no later than January 1, 1993. Provisional certification shall be valid for 2 years, except for those certifications extended pursuant to subsection e , provided that a person who has obtained a provisional certification must take an examination that is administered or approved by the Department within 12 months of the date on which the provisional certification was issued. Upon passing the examination, the Department shall certify the individual as an industrial radiographer. Provisional HB0559 Enrolled LRB103 04144 BMS 49150 b Public Act 103 0001  certification shall be nonrenewable. c The Agency may, by regulation, assess certification fees and fees to recover the cost of examining applicants for certification. d The Agency may suspend or revoke the certification of an industrial radiographer, or take other action as provided in Sections 36 and 38 of this Act, if a certified industrial radiographer violates this Act or any rule or regulation promulgated under this Act, or otherwise endangers the safety of himself, his co workers, or members of the general public. It shall be a violation of this Act for any person to allow an individual who is not a certified industrial radiographer to perform industrial radiography. e The Agency may extend the term of existing certifications for industrial radiographers and industrial radiographer trainees in 90 day increments, not to exceed a maximum period of 6 months beyond the initial term, to allow individuals time to meet the examination criteria. Industrial radiographers and industrial radiographer trainees shall meet all other requirements as set forth by the Agency. Source P.A. 94 104, eff. 7 1 05. Section 99. Effective date. This Act takes effect upon becoming law. HB0559 Enrolled LRB103 04144 BMS 49150 b Public Act 103 0001 