LEADERSHIP AND CAPABILITY TECHNOLOGY AND SYSTEMS RISK MANAGEMENT SERVICE DELIVERY AND PROGRAMS INJURY PREVENTION AND ENGAGEMENT What Departmental leaders that are visibly active on safety, health and wellbeing. People have the capability to manage safety, health, and wellbeing. Technology that provides data intelligence on safety, health and wellbeing. One management system that guides the department in managing safety, health and wellbeing. Focussed work on known safety, health and wellbeing risks, e.g. chemicals, electricity, mental health, frontline risk management programs at NMI and Questacon. A safety and case management team operating a contemporary service delivery model. Engagement programs that encourage cross departmental collaboration. Early intervention, case management and workers compensation programs that provide recovery services for staff. Why Leadership provides the impetus for continual improvement. Building staff capability means everyone can participate in better safety, health, and wellbeing outcomes. The department requires improved data and operational intelligence. Implementing one health and safety management system across the whole department will reduce duplication and red tape resulting in more efficient and effective delivery. To prevent injury and illness by proactively identifying hazards, assessing risk, implementing reasonably practicable and compliant controls. Improve the implementation of controls, safety assurance and testing of control effectiveness. Large departments require well resourced safety, health and wellbeing teams to deliver on the strategy. Using a service delivery model which drives line management accountability will mean work is distributed across the Department in the most efficient and effective way. Cross department engagement creates connections. Early intervention is proven to reduce the frequency and duration of claims and create better long term health outcomes. It is more efficient and effective to maintain a centralised case management team for complex cases. How 1. Deliver a contemporary training plan including a. Induction. b. Leadership. c. Health, safety, and wellbeing modules including psychosocial training. d. Refresher training. 2. Encourage all leaders to be visibly active on health, safety, and wellbeing and destigmatise mental health. 1. Develop and implement a health, safety, and wellbeing information management system software application. Consider workflow management capability. 2. Create a health, safety, and wellbeing space on the intranet. 1. Locally implemented risk management programs. 2. Electrical compliance program. 3. Chemical and hazardous substance program. 4. WHS Act and Regulation compliance audit. 5. Compliance action plans. 6. Upgrades and maintenance work. 1. Communicate new service delivery model. 2. Develop and communicate services catalogue. 3. Develop and implement annual plan of safety, health and wellbeing programs e.g. flu vaccinations . 1. Create cross departmental health and safety education, consultation, and collaboration frameworks. 2. Share the lessons from incidents with everyone. 3. Continue with early intervention, case management and works compensation team operations. Outcomes A critical mass of leaders and staff are trained in accordance with the training plan. Leaders are visible on the topic of safety, health and wellbeing. Better safety health and wellbeing decision making. Consistent standards of practice across the department. An ability to develop a safety assurance program. Compliance with WHS Act and Regulation. Maintain risk level as low as reasonably practicable. Successful delivery of relevant safety, health and wellbeing programs. Internal stakeholders provide positive feedback about the safety, health and wellbeing team. Staff and management engaged and well supported during times of specialist need. Measures 1. of staff trained in accordance with the training plan. 2. Number of health, safety, and wellbeing moments that leaders create each year. 1. Successful implementation of the management system. 2. Successful implementation of the IT system and better data reporting. 3. Successful launch of the intranet space. 1. Reduction in electric shocks. 2. Results of health and safety audit. 3. Assessment of the department s risk profile through pre and post implementation risk workshops 1. Service usage levels. 2. Successful delivery of annual programs. 1. Department wide engagement on WHS including sharing incident stories. 2. Reduction in workers compensation claims. 3. Increased usage of early intervention programs. Safety Health and Wellbeing Strategy 2020 2023 Objective To provide an inclusive and safe working environment for our people. SAFETY FIRST  Strategy Deliverables LEADERSHIP AND CAPABILITY TECHNOLOGY AND SYSTEMS RISK MANAGEMENT SERVICE DELIVERY AND PROGRAMS INJURY PREVENTION AND ENGAGEMENT Actions Hold divisional initiatives such as R U OK Day, Mental Health Month Include Health and Safety as a standard agenda items on meetings Attend and encourage staff to attend Health and Safety training Attend training and encouraging staff to do the same, Promote toolkits and resources available to staff Review reporting structure for WHS Committees, PeCCo and EB. Implement the departments first WHS Commitment Review the WHS Governance structure and TOR for current WHS Committees Review current suite of WHS training and implement a new program Research and procure an online platform for manage all things WHS and wellbeing One management system that guides the department in managing Safety Health and Wellbeing Build reporting capability in Aurion for the Working from home WHS checklist Assist in the development of a reasonable adjustments passport for employees Conduct a systematic review of the department, NMI and Questacon to streamline the WHS Management System Review processes and procedures to ensure they remain current. Develop departmental WHS risk register in line with the enterprise risk management framework Local risk management programs Electrical compliance program Review current working from home to align the department s policy guidance with Comcare, Safe Work recommendations Implementing approval and reporting system Implementing detailed WHS requirements Implement Contractor assurance review process for high and moderate risk contractors Develop and implement annual plan of health, safety, and wellbeing programs e.g. flu vaccinations . Review the current process for workstation assessments and automate the process. Continue to deliver WHS services to Climate Change Authority CCA and Arena. Research the possibility of providing subsidised WHS support for working at home Build engagement with State and Territory Offices. Tailored sessions for staff and managers i.e. resilience sessions, self care, Mental Health Support Implement strategies to support the mental wellbeing of our employees based on the recommendations from the APS Mental Health Capability Taskforce. Develop and promote a range of resources to raise awareness and reduce stigma of mental health Review the Workplace Contact Officer role Continue to promote participation in mental health first aid Develop and implement a new early intervention program for staff Promote services to managers and employees RMS refresh Updated iCentral page Talk to a case manager sessions Review current panel arrangements for workstation assessments and rehabilitation. People Branch, Corporate and Digital Division Department of Industry, Science, Energy and Resources Phone 61 2 6213 6000 Industry House, 10 Binara Street Canberra ACT 2601 GPO Box 2013 Canberra ACT 2601 industry.gov.au WHS STRATEGY GRAPHICS CONCEPT 1 SAFETY FIRST This Strategy aligns to the Engaged and inclusive workforce pillar of the department s People Strategy 2020 2022 Engaged and Inclusive Workforce Attra Future Ways of Working BUSINESS AS USUAL PEOPLE STRATEGY GRAPHICS CONCEPT 1 