STRETCH RECONCILIATION ACTION PLAN APRIL 2023 APRIL 2026  2 DEPARTMENT OF INDUSTRY, SCIENCE AND RESOURCES   RECONCILIATION ACTION PLAN 2023 2026 3 ACKNOWLEDGMENT The Department of Industry, Science and Resources recognises Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander peoples as the First Peoples of this nation. We recognise the ongoing traditional and modern cultural practices and connection to Country held by Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander peoples. We acknowledge Elders past, present and emerging as the Traditional Custodians and Lore Keepers of the world s oldest living culture. Meeting Place icon by DISR employee Amy Huggins  4 DEPARTMENT OF INDUSTRY, SCIENCE AND RESOURCES 4 DEPARTMENT OF INDUSTRY, SCIENCE AND RESOURCES Our vision for reconciliation Our vision for reconciliation is to value, understand, engage, respect, and embrace Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander peoples innovations, knowledge and cultures. We will strengthen our organisation s cultural capabilities and improve Australia s economic and social opportunities for Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander peoples. We are committed to building a workplace where reconciliation is core to our culture. We will deliver programs, policies and services that support Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander peoples and businesses to participate in and benefit from Australia s economic growth and job creation. We will work with Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander peoples, organisations and communities to share in economic development and social inclusion and achieve positive life outcomes for Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander peoples. We will support an inclusive, future focused workforce that respects and celebrates the cultures and achievements of Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander peoples provides opportunities and career pathways for Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander peoples where they feel empowered ensures that the department and broader community can benefit from the knowledge and experience of Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander peoples. We aim to raise awareness, inspire and enable each individual s contribution to reconciliation. We will share our reconciliation stories together test our assumptions challenge our perceptions actively engage and listen to each other. We are committed to building a workplace where reconciliation is core to our culture   RECONCILIATION ACTION PLAN 2023 2026 5  6 DEPARTMENT OF INDUSTRY, SCIENCE AND RESOURCES Plenty Big Country by Riki Salam Mualgal, Kaurareg, Kuku Yalanji , We are 27 Creative.   RECONCILIATION ACTION PLAN 2023 2026 7 Our artwork The Department of Industry, Science, and Resources RAP Artwork explained. We re proud to share our Reconciliation Action Plan artwork, Plenty Big Country by Riki Salam. This artwork depicts the richness of diversity and the dynamic nature of this sector. It also depicts various aspects of the natural and cultural landscape of Australia both physically and metaphorically. The circular motif at the centre of the artwork represents the department and Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander communities from across Australia coming together to discuss innovative ways of working and advancing together as one. Pathways move to and from the department to Community, where knowledge is shared and imparted to create new and better opportunities to benefit and advance all Australians. The patterning that encompasses the main artwork elements represent how all Country is connected and how Culture is infused as one. These markings reference natural depictions of our vast landscape saltwater, freshwater, rainforest, desert, stone, cold and everywhere in between. They also show human interactions on the environment carved, etched, painted, burnt and contoured. These aspects speak of human ingenuity and adaptation to place, landscape and country through the many resources it affords us. This generates new ways of thinking and being, enriching the Country through dynamic innovation. These ways of thinking bring together the wisdom and ancient knowledge of Country to modern ways. About the artist Riki Salam is Principal, Creative Director and artist of We are 27 Creative. Born in 1972 and raised in Cairns on Yidinji Land, he is a member of and connected to Kala Lagaw Ya Western Island groups St Pauls, Moa Island and Kuku Yalanji Peoples on his father and grandfather s side. He is a member of the Ngai Tahu people in the South Island of New Zealand on his mother s side. Educated in Cairns and Brisbane, he has over 20 years of industry experience as a graphic designer and artist. Riki has worked on many high profile projects including the Qantas painted Boeing 747 800 Yananyi Dreaming . He has produced artworks for Telstra, the Healing Foundation and the Australian Human Rights Commission to name a few. Riki also designed the identity for the G20 in 2014. He works in pen, ink and brush, gouache on paper and with acrylic paints, exploring concepts of traditional culture in a contemporary format.  8 DEPARTMENT OF INDUSTRY, SCIENCE AND RESOURCES Secretary s foreword The Department of Industry, Science and Resources has a strong commitment to reconciliation. That is why I am proud to present the department s Stretch Reconciliation Action Plan RAP 2023 2026, representing our formal commitment to reconciliation and setting out how we will contribute to Australia s broader reconciliation journey. This RAP builds on the significant progress we have made since launching our first RAP in 2014. During this time, we ve achieved some great outcomes, including introducing the Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander Business Support Roadmap, which provides guidance for businesses to contribute to and benefit from Australia s economic growth entering into a historic land use agreement with the Wajarri Yamatji community for the site of the Square Kilometre Array telescope introducing an Indigenous Scholarship Program, which provides our First Nations staff with access to an extensive range of study options increasing our First Nations staff representation from 1.6 to 2.5 through recruitment initiatives and investment in entry level programs. We are proud of these achievements, and yet we recognise that there is still more we can and should do, using this Stretch RAP as a foundation from which to continue building. This Stretch RAP demonstrates how we will work with First Nations peoples, communities and organisations to deliver improved employment initiatives increase our cultural competency celebrate First Nations cultures embed reconciliation in all our work through divisional reconciliation plans. Our Stretch RAP will also support the department to make our contribution to the government s priorities to Close the Gap and implement the Uluru Statement from the Heart. The development of this Stretch RAP was a collective effort and I would like to thank staff across the department who contributed, in particular our First Nations colleagues. As we look forward, it is now up to us as leaders, managers and individual team members to work together to achieve the successful implementation of our Stretch RAP. I look forward to working with you to realise this ambitious plan. Meghan Quinn PSM Secretary Department of Industry, Science and Resources   RECONCILIATION ACTION PLAN 2023 2026 9 Reconciliation Australia s foreword On behalf of Reconciliation Australia, I congratulate the Department of Industry, Science and Resources on its first Stretch Reconciliation Action Plan RAP . Formed around the pillars of relationships, respect, and opportunities, the RAP program provides organisations with a framework to contribute to the reconciliation movement. This framework allows for continuous development, pushing organisations to constantly embed and expand on their commitments, while adapting to obstacles and circumstances as they arise. With a national outlook and reach, sitting at the nexus of business, job creation, science and technology, the department has a mandate to ensure Australia s economy is productive, innovative and sustainable. Undeniably, with the reach of this remit and the scope of its operations, the department has considerable potential to drive outcomes for reconciliation. The department s reconciliation journey so far and its previous Innovate RAP have helped it hone this understanding of its vision for reconciliation and the particular role it can play in the movement. Through this process, it has come to recognise not only the economic and social opportunities it can create for Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander peoples, but so too the unique knowledge, experience and perspectives of First Nations peoples that must be upheld in order for Australia to thrive. The achievements of the department s previous RAPs have focussed on its internal sphere of influence enacting widespread affirmative action policies across its recruitment, establishing an Indigenous Employee Network, and committing its staff to cultural awareness training. These efforts form the foundations of this Stretch RAP and ensure its future activities are supported by a culturally safe workforce and directed by its enabled and empowered Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander staff members. The department s first Stretch RAP, however, will challenge and develop its capabilities, pushing its scope outside its 4 walls and creating impact in the wider community. New commitments include implementing a whole of portfolio affirmative measures recruitment initiative and mobility program for First Nations staff, as well as establishing a portfolio reconciliation working group to collaborate and push for change across agencies. Linking these efforts to targets in the National Agreement on Closing the Gap will help strengthen and guide these aims. Ultimately this Stretch RAP shows the department taking next steps by leveraging its work to create benefits and tangible outcomes for Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander peoples and indeed, for wider Australia. On behalf of Reconciliation Australia, I commend the Department of Industry, Science, Energy and Resources on this Stretch RAP and look forward to following its ongoing reconciliation journey. Karen Mundine Chief Executive Officer Reconciliation Australia  10 DEPARTMENT OF INDUSTRY, SCIENCE AND RESOURCES Our department The Department of Industry, Science and Resources drives economic growth and job creation for all Australians. We aim to build a better future for all Australians by ensuring Australia has a more productive, science and technology enriched, resilient and sustainable economy. We do this by providing influential and valued advice to government and implementing policies and programs to achieve strong and sustainable economic outcomes for the Australian community. We help build a better future for all Australians by ensuring Australia has a more productive, resilient and sustainable economy by investing in science, technology and commercialisation and growing innovative and competitive businesses, industries and regions. Australia s resources sector and industry also plays a vital role in the global transition to a low carbon future. Our portfolio is at the heart of the government s drive to revitalise Australian industry and make the most of new and emerging technologies like artificial intelligence AI , robotics and quantum computing to generate productive, sustainable and high value jobs. Our policies, programs and services play a critical role in the Australian economy by assisting businesses to grow improving productivity and increase exports providing appropriate regulation building resilience in our supply chains. An important part of this will be implementing the Buy Australian Plan to improve the way Australian Government contracts work, ensuring more opportunities are available to Australian businesses and their employees. Our portfolio includes these entities Anti Dumping Commission Australian Building Codes Board Australian Nuclear Science and Technology Organisation ANSTO Australian Radioactive Waste Agency Australian Space Agency Commonwealth Scientific and Industrial Research Organisation CSIRO Geoscience Australia IP Australia National Offshore Petroleum Safety and Environmental Management Authority NOPSEMA Office of the Chief Scientist Industry Innovation and Science Australia.   RECONCILIATION ACTION PLAN 2023 2026 11 WESTERN AUSTRALIA SOUTH AUSTRALIA QUEENSLAND NEW SOUTH WALES VICTORIA TASMANIA INTERNATIONAL AUSTRALIAN CAPITAL TERRITORY NORTHERN TERRITORY Our footprint We have a geographically dispersed workforce across Australia and employ 3,100 people in over 65 locations. We currently employ 68 Aboriginal and or Torres Strait Islander people, which represents 2.3 of our workforce. We are committed to making our department the best place to work. We have a workplace culture that is respectful, inclusive and diverse. All employees have a sense of belonging and can bring their whole, authentic selves to work every day. We strongly believe that diversity of experience, perspectives and background will lead to a better environment for our employees and better outcomes for Australia. This map highlights our national footprint.  12 DEPARTMENT OF INDUSTRY, SCIENCE AND RESOURCES Our reconciliation journey We launched our first RAP in 2008. Since then, our reconciliation journey has helped us grow as a department. We are proud of our history working closely with Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander peoples across Australia and our commitment to employment opportunities for Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander peoples. Our journey has provided important economic and social opportunities for Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander peoples and communities. Our achievements... We established a strong Indigenous Employee Network. The network provides peer support, networking and professional development opportunities for Aboriginal and or Torres Strait Islander employees. We carried out a cultural and inclusion review to build a collective approach and commitment to cultural change and inclusion. We developed and launched our Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander Business Support Roadmap. This includes initiatives to improve Aboriginal and or Torres Strait Islander business access to programs improve Aboriginal and or Torres Strait Islander business outcomes through procurement build our Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander engagement ecosystem. We built the economic capacity of Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander businesses through the government s Indigenous Procurement Policy. We continue to grow in this area and provide economic opportunities to suppliers. This includes contracting Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander cultural advisors, conference and cultural capability workshop facilitators, and community members to provide cultural immersion experiences, performances and localised expertise. By procuring these services we have built strong ongoing relationships with Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander people, businesses and communities. In 2020 we signed a portfolio wide Statement of Reconciliation demonstrating our ongoing commitment to reconciliation principles, particularly relating to cultural protocols, recruitment, and policy and program delivery. The statement has led to a more collaborative approach to reconciliation, enabled ongoing dialogue between portfolio agencies, and provided more opportunities for Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander economic empowerment. We provided development opportunities, including training, and launched our Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander scholarship program, with 3 scholarships being awarded to date. We will continue building these opportunities so staff can further enhance their skills and take on leadership roles in the department.   RECONCILIATION ACTION PLAN 2023 2026 13 In 2021 we partnered with a First Nations recruitment agency to deliver an affirmative measures recruitment round. This ensured recruitment processes were targeted, streamlined and supported direct entry pathways for Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander candidates. We hired 28 new staff, increasing the department s proportion of Aboriginal and or Torres Strait Islander staff from 1.6  to 2.5 We offer our staff cultural immersion experiences including on Country visits, Jawun Program secondments and participation in the Garma Festival. These experiences let staff connect with Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander cultures at a deeper level and appreciate the values and diversity of traditional knowledge. Staff who participated in these opportunities brought their learnings back to the workplace and continue sharing their knowledge with others to build a deeper understanding of Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander cultures. In July 2021 we launched the Arrilla Digital workplace cultural competency tool for all employees. More than 2000 staff have completed the cultural awareness training.  14 DEPARTMENT OF INDUSTRY, SCIENCE AND RESOURCES Case Study 1 Affirmative measures recruitment round Our Indigenous Affirmative Measures Program in 2021 demonstrated our commitment to reconciliation and the value of inclusion and diversity. The program was led by our People Branch in partnership with Aboriginal Employment Strategy, a specialist Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander recruitment agency. We invested significant time and effort in an approach that established trust provided personalised support, empowerment and mentoring of Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander candidates emphasised accountability and inclusion. We attracted candidates using a variety of channels, including targeted online advertising Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander radio stations connecting with Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander businesses standard advertising channels, such as the department website and APSJobs website. Aboriginal Employment Strategy also worked hard to identify and recruit candidates through community networks. We ensured the screening, selection and placement of candidates was inclusive, accessible and provided tailored support. Candidates received detailed information to help them understand roles and business requirements. This gave them meaningful opportunities to showcase their capabilities, capacity and interests with confidence. Candidates received specialised induction and training based on their needs. The skills, adaptability and attitudes of the trainers were vital to the success of the training program. We provided ongoing support for successful candidates based on their individual strengths and needs. The inclusion business partner in People Branch led this support in conjunction with employees and their managers. By creating support for each employee, the inclusion business partner will increase retention and provide meaningful employment pathways. The Indigenous Affirmative Measures Program has demonstrated impressive outcomes, including placing 28 Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander employees in various roles across the department a robust, supportive network to build employees confidence, connection and skills a high level of staff satisfaction in how we managed the recruitment, employment and training process. Key learnings We previously had limited success using standard recruitment methods to attract Aboriginal and or Torres Strait Islander candidates. Our previous bulk affirmative measures round was Canberra centric and only used traditional APS marketing strategies. We saw a significant improvement in the number and quality of applications we received by partnering with a specialist Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander recruitment agency developing a bespoke marketing strategy taking advantage of our national footprint. We will continue using this recruitment method and share the lessons we learned with other organisations.   RECONCILIATION ACTION PLAN 2023 2026 15 Case Study 2 Arrilla Digital Cultural Competency Program The Arrilla Digital cultural competency program has been critical in increasing our overall cultural awareness, competency and safety. Before we introduced Arrilla Digital, less than 5 of staff had completed an online cultural competency program. We saw this as an opportunity to make real progress on reconciliation in the department. We partnered with a Supply Nation certified provider Arrilla Digital to roll out an organisation wide online cultural capability program that met our department s specific needs. We used a sustained promotion campaign to ensure the program was successful. Shelly Reys, CEO and founder of Arrilla, gave the keynote address for our National Reconciliation Week 2021 program and launched Arrilla Digital. We followed the launch with an internal communications campaign that included messages from our secretary, intranet articles and talking points for senior executives. Heads of division received weekly updates for 2 months, outlining how many of their staff had completed the program and suggesting strategies to increase uptake. Within 3 months of launch, over 2,000 staff had completed the Arrilla Digital training, which was 70 of our workforce. This gave staff a strong baseline of cultural competency to support our intake of Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander staff in 2021. Key learnings During our last RAP we identified that we weren t meeting our targets for cultural learning. Building cultural capability is one of our priorities, so it was important to address this issue. We identified that our existing cultural competency training offering wasn t fit for purpose, particularly our online training. By introducing an aligned online training package, we saw completion rates reach over 70 within 12 months. In this RAP we will keep investing in tailored cultural learning programs. This will help employees better understand, value and recognise Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander cultures, histories, artwork, knowledge and rights.  16 DEPARTMENT OF INDUSTRY, SCIENCE AND RESOURCES Our Indigenous Employee Network The department s Indigenous Employee Network IEN was established in 2014 with a handful of proud Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander people. It was initially a support network for members to form relationships through support, guidance, mentoring and connection. Today, with a growing number of Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander employees in the department, the IEN also provides cultural advice on policies and programs to support our reconciliation agenda. It lets the views and aspirations of Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander staff be heard and addressed in a positive and solution focused way. Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander staff can also get advice and support from the network on a range of issues. The network supports the department s efforts to create a culturally safe and inclusive workplace. It does this by providing leadership and direction on the department s inclusion and diversity targets for Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander peoples. The network promotes cultural understanding and capability of all staff. It advises on traditional and modern cultural protocols and promotes significant events for Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander peoples.  Every year the network holds a forum for Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander staff. This is a First Nations centred workplace experience to support members intra cultural connections. It supports the social, emotional and professional wellbeing of the department s Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander staff. Message from the Indigenous Employee Network co chairs The IEN supports the development and implementation of our Stretch RAP. We, the IEN co chairs, believe that this RAP will promote a new element of diversity and encourage a positive conversation for all Australians, no matter their cultural background. One of the fundamental pillars for reconciliation is working together. We all need to take part in building and strengthening the relationships between Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander peoples and non Indigenous people. The department s Stretch RAP will pave the way for a culturally safe workplace and start the next steps to an inclusive work environment. We hope that divisions will support and engage with Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander staff and networks to allow their voices to be heard. This Stretch RAP is a plan, but we need demonstrated actions and commitment from across the department to create change. One such action is meaningful conversation. This RAP provides an opportunity to demonstrate how this conversation can occur in a positive and respectful manner for all. Kalen Gilbert and Laura Frassetto Lea   RECONCILIATION ACTION PLAN 2023 2026 17 Indigenous Employee Network forum  18 DEPARTMENT OF INDUSTRY, SCIENCE AND RESOURCES Our Stretch Reconciliation Action Plan We are excited to deliver our Stretch RAP. Since our first RAP in 2008, our investment, partnerships and collaboration with Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander peoples and communities have continued to grow. After the success of our Innovate RAP, we are excited to take the next step in our reconciliation journey. We have set ambitious reconciliation targets for the next 3 years, which are set out in the following sections. Targets are aligned with our areas of expertise, influence and relationships. This RAP was a collaborative effort, guided by our RAP Steering Committee, which has 8 Aboriginal and or Torres Strait Islander members our Indigenous Employee Network Mr Geoff Richardson PSM, our independent advisor our Executive Board representatives from departmental divisions. We held consultation workshops with all departmental divisions and portfolio agencies over several months. The workshops discussed the review of the RAP, its purpose and how areas and individuals could positively impact the RAP. This extensive consultation gave staff opportunities to share information and collaborate. It also let us reflect on our reconciliation journey, what we have achieved and what more we want to do. Each of our divisions has developed their own divisional reconciliation action plan, which will help us embed reconciliation into the way we work across the department. The Stretch RAP has been endorsed by the RAP Steering Committee and Executive Board. The RAP Steering Committee is the governing body of the RAP and is ultimately responsible for its implementation and reporting phases. The steering committee will meet 4 times a year to track and report on progress in implementing the current RAP contribute to activities in the RAP consult with Reconciliation Australia as needed develop a new RAP near the expiry date of the current RAP. The RAP will be further guided by our Indigenous Champions and RAP Champions. Indigenous Champions are responsible for advocating for improved recruitment, retention and developmental outcomes for Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander staff. They work closely with Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander staff to ensure their priorities are understood and ideas for making improvements are captured, considered and progressed. RAP Champions are responsible for promoting and driving reconciliation across the department and throughout our sphere of influence as well as leading our Stretch RAP priorities.   RECONCILIATION ACTION PLAN 2023 2026 19 We would like to thank the RAP Steering Committee and Indigenous Employee Network for their contribution. Chair Head of Division, AusIndustry Indigenous Employee Network co chairs Senior Business Outreach Officer, CFO Group Manager, CIO Group Program Officer, AusIndustry Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander staff representatives General Manager, Entrepreneurs Programme Branch Manager Indigenous Engagement, Australian Radioactive Waste Agency Assistant Manager Business Capability and Growth RAP Champions Head of Division, Commercialisation Division Head of Division, Manufacturing Division Head of Division, Science Division General Manager, Economic and Industry Analysis Branch People and Culture Committee representative Head of Division, Technology and National Security Division External advisor Geoff Richardson Closing the Gap Our RAP reflects our commitment to the objectives of the National Agreement on Closing the Gap. Many of our actions will directly impact on Closing the Gap priority reforms, including building and maintaining reliable and trusted partnerships with Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander people, organisations and communities priority reform 1 formal partnerships and shared decision making working with Traditional Owners to identify ways to increase our workforce s capability to build partnerships priority reform 1 formal partnerships and shared decision making engaging and forming partnerships with Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander owned businesses priority reform 2 building the community controlled sector increasing the number of Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander people we employ and sharing our recruitment expertise with other organisations priority reform 3 transforming government organisations building the cultural competency of our staff and sharing learning resources across our portfolio priority reform 3 transforming government organisations ongoing implementation of anti discrimination strategies priority reform 3 . We will also explore and identify further opportunities to contribute to Closing the Gap.  20 DEPARTMENT OF INDUSTRY, SCIENCE AND RESOURCES Our stretch priorities We will pilot a whole of portfolio affirmative measures recruitment initiative. We will increase Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander representation at the Executive Level EL and Senior Executive Service SES classifications through targeted recruitment. We will introduce career planning tools for Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander staff, including a mentorship program led by our Indigenous Champions. All divisions will develop and implement divisional reconciliation plans articulating how they will contribute to reconciliation. We will pilot a whole of portfolio mobility program with a focus on development opportunities.   RECONCILIATION ACTION PLAN 2023 2026 21 We will establish a portfolio working group to drive the implementation of the Statement of Reconciliation. The first meeting will be chaired by our secretary and focus on Closing the Gap. All staff will have the opportunity to participate in Acknowledgement of Country training. Where possible we will work with local Traditional Owners to deliver this training. Our SES staff will have the opportunity to undertake an immersive cultural learning experience. In collaboration with Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander stakeholders, we will adopt and apply the National Indigenous Australians Agency s cultural protocols. This will help our staff engage with Aboriginal and or Torres Strait Islander people, communities and organisations the right way. All supervisors of Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander staff will complete face to face cultural competency training.  22 DEPARTMENT OF INDUSTRY, SCIENCE AND RESOURCES Relationships Our department has a unique role in the industry, science and resources sector. We are spread over many locations in metropolitan, urban, regional and remote areas of Australia. This provides a unique opportunity to work with many Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander peoples and communities to incorporate traditional knowledge and values in our work. We will develop and strengthen respectful relationships with Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander peoples across our work, through deepened consultation, partnership, cooperation and communication. We will strengthen staff understanding and awareness of issues affecting Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander peoples. We consider Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander outcomes in all that we do. Action Deliverables Timeline Lead Establish and maintain mutually beneficial relationships with Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander stakeholders and organisations. We will work with local Traditional Owners to develop and implement place based engagement training. We will make the training available to all staff that work directly with Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander communities. June 2024 Manager, Capability and Workforce Planning Establish and maintain 3 formal two way partnerships with Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander communities and organisations. We will highlight at least 2 successful two way relationships each year through our internal communications channels. August every year Deputy Secretaries Contribute to the implementation of the National Agreement on Closing the Gap in partnership with Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander communities. February each year Head of Division, Strategic Policy Division Meet with local Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander stakeholders and organisations to continuously improve guiding principles for engagement. February each year Deputy Secretaries Develop and implement a whole of department engagement plan to facilitate effective engagement with Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander stakeholders. The engagement plan will set out principles, developed in consultation with Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander stakeholders, to guide the department s future engagement activities. June 2024 Head of Division, Strategic Policy Division Build relationships by celebrating National Reconciliation Week NRW . Each year we will assign a different divisions or portfolio agencies to establish an NRW organising committee organise NRW activities encourage and support all staff to attend. January every year Head of Division of organising committee The NRW organising committee will be responsible for organising at least one department wide activity each day during NRW and at least one activity in each state office. It will also ensure resources and information are available to all staff. May every year Head of Division of organising committee Continue to provide Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander staff with access to cultural leave that can be used to observe NRW. May every year Chief Operating Officer Register our NRW events on Reconciliation Australia s NRW website to allow external agency involvement in our activities. May every year Head of Division of organising committee RAP Steering Committee members to participate in at least 2 external NRW events each year. June every year Head of Division of organising committee Encourage and support staff and leaders to participate in at least 5 external NRW events each year. 27 May to 3 June every year Head of Division of organising committee   RECONCILIATION ACTION PLAN 2023 2026 23 Action Deliverables Timeline Lead Promote reconciliation through our sphere of influence. Publish our RAP on our website and intranet. Promote internal tools to communicate our RAP initiatives and outcomes to all staff and our stakeholders. April 2023 Manager, Communications Participate in at least 2 quarterly RAP leadership gatherings each year. June every year General Manager, People Branch Develop, implement and review a RAP communications strategy to communicate our RAP to all internal and external stakeholders. July 2023 Manager, Inclusion People Branch Engage all staff to drive reconciliation by developing divisional reconciliation plans. Evaluate participation and implementation every year. February each year Manager, Inclusion People Branch Reaffirm our commitment to reconciliation by collaborating with other RAP and like minded organisations, including our portfolio agencies and other public sector agencies, to implement ways to advance reconciliation. February each year Manager, Inclusion People Branch Identify RAP network organisations, including recently joined members, that align to the industry, science and resources portfolio and engage with them to identify opportunities to collaborate and partner in delivering reconciliation initiatives. June 2024 Manager, Inclusion People Branch Promote reconciliation and the benefits of developing a RAP to portfolio agencies and stakeholders. February each year Manager, Inclusion People Branch Promote positive relationships through anti discrimination strategies. Formally engage with the Indigenous Employee Network and advisors to improve our anti discrimination policy. December 2023 and December 2024 Head of Division Provide ongoing education to senior leaders and managers on the effects of racism, including through the division heads meeting. Include information in leadership training on the effects of racism. June every year Manager, Capability and Workforce Planning Implement and communicate an anti discrimination policy and initiatives for the department. February 2024 and February 2025 Manager, Safety, Wellbeing and People Support Provide ongoing education to senior leaders and managers on the effects of racism, including through cultural competency training. June every year Manager, Capability and Workforce Planning Senior leaders will publicly support anti discrimination campaigns, initiatives or stances against racism. For example, the Racism. It stops with me. campaign.. February each year Deputy Secretaries Continuously improve HR policies and procedures on anti discrimination. February each year Manager, HR Policy People Branch Engage with Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander staff and advisors to continuously improve our anti discrimination policy. February each year Manager, HR Policy People Branch and Manager, Inclusion People Branch Lead collaboration across the portfolio to advance reconciliation, including delivering our Statement of Reconciliation. Establish a portfolio reconciliation working group to collaborate and drive reconciliation outcomes. The group will meet at least twice a year. April 2023 Manager, Inclusion People Branch Share cultural training resources with portfolio agencies. June 2023 Manager, Inclusion People Branch Establish and maintain mutually beneficial relationships with portfolio agencies by developing and implementing mobility development opportunities for Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander staff. June 2024 Manager, Inclusion People Branch Develop a portfolio working group to lead NAIDOC week and NRW event collaborations by sharing resources, event coordination logistics and costs. May and June every year Head of Division of organising committee  24 DEPARTMENT OF INDUSTRY, SCIENCE AND RESOURCES Respect We respect the experiences, cultures, histories, knowledge, perspectives and rights of Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander peoples. We will continue building cultural competency by embracing and expanding our knowledge of Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander cultures and their customs and traditions. As part of our commitment, we will develop opportunities to expand our understanding and knowledge of Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander cultures, customs and traditions and build cultural proficiency. We will help managers and supervisors build respectful relationships with Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander staff, stakeholders and communities. Action Deliverables Timeline Lead Increase understanding, value and recognition of Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander cultures, histories, knowledge and rights through cultural learning. Ensure all portfolio agencies can access to the department s online cultural competency training. December 2023 Manager, Capability and Workforce Planning Consult local Traditional Owners and or Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander advisors when reviewing and updating our cultural learning strategy. December 2024 Manager, Capability and Workforce Planning Give all SES the opportunity to participate in immersive cultural development and ensure at least 5 SES take up this opportunity every year. June every year Manager, Talent, Leadership SES Unit Supervisors of Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander staff to complete online and face to face cultural competency training. All current supervisors to complete training by December 2023. New managers to complete training within one month of an Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander staff member joining their team. December every year Manager, Capability and Workforce Planning Continue to develop, implement and increase the engagement of face to face cultural competency. Use our communication channels to improve awareness of Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander cultures, with at least 5 of our staff attending face to face cultural competency training each year. June every year Manager, Capability and Workforce Planning All SES staff to complete Arrilla cultural awareness training through our online e learning platform. December 2023 Manager, Talent, Leadership SES Unit Maintain an online cultural competency completion level of at least 70 of staff for the duration of the RAP. June every year Manager, Capability and Workforce Planning Review and update our cultural learning strategy. June every year Manager, Capability and Workforce Planning   RECONCILIATION ACTION PLAN 2023 2026 25 Action Deliverables Timeline Lead Demonstrate respect to Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander peoples by observing cultural protocols. Provide information on our intranet on the purpose and significance behind cultural protocols, including Acknowledgement of Country and Welcome to Country protocols. June 2023 Manager, Capability and Workforce Planning In collaboration with Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander stakeholders, communities and organisations, we will adopt and apply the National Indigenous Australians Agency s cultural protocols. These guide staff on engaging with Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander people, communities and organisations. We will tailor the protocols for all local communities we operate in. February 2024 Manager, Inclusion Invite a local Traditional Owner to perform a Welcome to Country at departmental wide events including all staff meetings and the Secretary s Awards. December every year Manager, Internal Communications Continue building staff confidence and understanding of Welcome to Country and Acknowledgment of Country by providing online resources and training. This will improve staff understanding of the purpose and significance of these protocols and help them deliver a meaningful Acknowledgement of Country at all internal and external meetings. June 2023 Manager, Inclusion Staff and senior leaders to provide an Acknowledgement of Country or other appropriate protocols at all public events. December every year Manager, Inclusion Continue displaying Acknowledgment of Country plaques in our head office and each of our state offices. December every year Manager, Inclusion Ensure all staff can participate in centrally funded Acknowledgement of Country training. 75 of staff to have completed this training by June 2025. June 2025 Manager, Capability and Workforce Planning Engage with Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander cultures and histories by celebrating NAIDOC Week. Each year we will assign a different division to develop a calendar of NAIDOC Week events celebrating Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander histories and cultures. Events will take place across our portfolio and include state offices. November every year Head of Division of organising committee Continue providing Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander staff with cultural leave that can be used to celebrate NAIDOC Week. December every year Head of Division of organising committee Promote the option for staff to use cultural leave in the lead up to NAIDOC Week. Ensure we remove any other barriers to staff participating in NAIDOC Week activities. May every year Head of Division of organising committee In consultation with Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander stakeholders, support and encourage all staff to participate in at least one NAIDOC Week event each year. June every year Head of Division of organising committee The RAP Working Group will participate in an external NAIDOC Week event. July every year Manager, Inclusion Promote at least 5 external NAIDOC Week activities and encourage and support staff to participate in these events. June every year Manager, Inclusion  26 DEPARTMENT OF INDUSTRY, SCIENCE AND RESOURCES Opportunities We want to be an employer of choice for Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander people. We will do this by recruiting, developing and providing meaningful career opportunities for Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander staff and creating a positive environment where they can thrive. We will continue creating partnerships with Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander businesses. We will build on the foundations of our previous RAP to continue engaging with and building strong relationships with Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander communities and organisations. This will contribute to the Australian Government s approach to improving the life outcomes of Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander peoples. Action Deliverables Timeline Lead Improve employment outcomes by increasing Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander representation in our workforce. Conduct at least one department wide bulk Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander recruitment round. The recruitment will focus on senior APS and Executive Level vacancies. December 2023 Manager, Inclusion Review and update our Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander recruitment, retention, and professional development strategy including increasing our Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander employment target to 3 . June 2023 Manager, Inclusion Engage with Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander staff to consult on the effectiveness of our recruitment, retention and professional development strategy. June 2024 Manager, Inclusion Conduct an affirmative measures recruitment round for at least one Senior Executive Service position in the department. July 2023 Deputy Secretaries Pilot an affirmative measures recruitment initiative for our whole portfolio. Portfolio agencies can choose to opt in to the initiative. February 2024 Manager, Inclusion Review human resources and recruitment procedures and policies to remove barriers to Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander participation in our workplace. June 2024 Manager, Recruitment Develop guidance to help business areas conduct affirmative measures recruitment. This will include advertising strategies, selection panel requirements and team cultural competency requirements. June 2023 Manager, Recruitment Achieve 3 Aboriginal and or Torres Strait Islander representation at each of the following classification groups APS 1 6, EL 1 2 and SES. We will do this by increasing the number of affirmative measures recruitment activities and identified positions in each division. February 2026 Manager, Inclusion Continue running affirmative measures processes for Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander candidates alongside bulk selection rounds. February each year Manager, Recruitment Continue to advertise job vacancies to effectively reach Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander stakeholders through various media including online job boards and print media. February each year Manager, Recruitment   RECONCILIATION ACTION PLAN 2023 2026 27 Action Deliverables Timeline Lead Increase Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander supplier diversity to improve economic and social outcomes. Promote procurement of Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander vendors to all staff through guidance materials and training programs. May every year Manager, Procurement Maintain commercial relationships with at least 20 Aboriginal and or Torres Strait Islander businesses. February each year Manager, Inclusion Continue Supply Nation membership. May every year Manager, Procurement Remove barriers to procuring goods and services from Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander businesses by developing a quick reference guide for staff to engage businesses through Supply Nation or an equivalent organisation. June 2024 Manager, Inclusion and Manager, Procurement Award 6 of eligible departmental procurements by volume to Aboriginal and or Torres Strait Islander businesses. June 2025 Chief Finance Officer Exceed Commonwealth Indigenous Procurement Policy targets for the value of eligible procurements. 2 of the value of eligible departmental procurements will be awarded to Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander businesses in the 2022 23 financial year. This target will increase by 0.25 each year of the RAP. September each year Chief Finance Officer Maintain and continually review our Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander procurement strategy and practices. September each year Manager, Procurement Improve employment outcomes by providing career development opportunities and tools for our Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander staff. Develop and implement a pilot group of high performing Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander employees to participate in a developmental mentoring program. April 2023 Indigenous Champion Offer one on one career development conversations and planning to all Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander staff. This service will be provided by an Indigenous Business provider in partnership with our People Branch. December 2023 RAP Champion Establish a 12 month training program for all Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander employees who join the department through an employment program. The training program will give staff the foundational knowledge and skills to succeed in their roles and the public service. December 2023 Manager, Inclusion Identify and act on opportunities to contribute to Closing the Gap. The secretary to host a forum with internal stakeholders, Indigenous Employee Network representatives and portfolio agency representatives on how we can focus our portfolio s efforts in Closing the Gap. August 2023 Secretary Publish the outcomes of the forum and associated initiatives on our intranet to provide all staff with an understanding of what the department is doing and how they can contribute. September 2023 Secretary Our secretary and members of our Senior Executive Service will participate in the Territories Stolen Generations Redress Scheme. October every year Secretary Engage and collaborate with Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander staff to develop and implement Closing the Gap initiatives. This wil ensure Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander staff have a leadership role in designing and conducting initiatives. These staff will also be able to assess whether the initiatives have been fair, transparent and open. October every year Secretary  28 DEPARTMENT OF INDUSTRY, SCIENCE AND RESOURCES Action Deliverables Timeline Lead Increase partnerships, access and inclusion for Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander businesses. Build a partnership and establish a memorandum of understanding between Indigenous Business Australia and AusIndustry to deliver culturally appropriate content, support and advisory sessions to First Nations businesses. December 2023 Head of Division, AusIndustry Include Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander engagement plans as a requirement in 80 of manufacturing grant programs by 2025. This will encourage active participation in reconciliation from Australian businesses. June 2025 Head of Division, Manufacturing Division Develop a special edition insights report on First Nations businesses, drawing on AusIndustry and other data to create a shared understanding of the experiences and issues for First Nations businesses. December 2023 Head of Division, AusIndustry Lead the space sector through inclusive partnerships with Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander people, communities and organisations. This includes development of practical advice around engagement for Australian civil space activities on country including launch, in Earth orbit  e.g. Satellite operations , and beyond Earth orbit e.g. Planetary exploration . March each year Agency Head, Australian Space Agency Develop policy that fosters domestic and international opportunities for First Nations businesses and communities to participate in and benefit from civil space activities in Australia and demonstrate the uniquely Australian approach to space. March each year Agency Head, Australian Space Agency   RECONCILIATION ACTION PLAN 2023 2026 29 Governance The department will achieve and report on all the targets in this RAP in a collaborative and transparent way. Action Deliverables Timeline Lead Embed reconciliation by developing and implementing divisional reconciliation plans. Each division to develop a divisional reconciliation plan that sets out their key priorities for reconciliation. April 2023 Heads of Division Support the implementation of divisional reconciliation plans by evaluating plans, targets and actions every year. Division heads will update the People and Culture Committee on progress against goals. July every year Heads of Division Establish and maintain an effective RAP Working Group to govern the RAP. The department will maintain a working group that includes members from each division at least 6 Aboriginal and or Torres Strait Islander members the chairs of the Indigenous Employee Network. February every year Manager, Inclusion The RAP working group to meet at least 4 times a year to drive and monitor the RAP s implementation. February, May, August and November every year Manager, Inclusion Develop terms of reference for the RAP Working Group that set out meeting frequency, roles and responsibilities. June 2023 Manager, Inclusion Provide appropriate support to implement RAP commitments. Continue a centrally funded and resourced model to deliver the RAP July every year Secretary Develop and implement appropriate systems and capabilities to track, measure and report on RAP activities. Share project plans for major initiatives on the department s intranet. June 2023 Manager, Inclusion Continue to have dedicated Indigenous Champions at the Senior Executive level February each year Indigenous Champion Continue our RAP Champion model, with up to 6 RAP Champions in the Senior Executive cohort. July every year RAP Champions Embed responsibility for delivering RAP actions in the performance expectations of all staff, including senior management. July every year Manager, Inclusion Include RAP implementation as a standing agenda item in relevant meetings of senior management. July every year Manager, Inclusion  30 DEPARTMENT OF INDUSTRY, SCIENCE AND RESOURCES Action Deliverables Timeline Lead Build accountability and transparency by reporting RAP achievements, challenges and learnings internally and externally. Complete and submit the annual RAP Impact Measurement Questionnaire to Reconciliation Australia. September every year Manager, Inclusion Report quarterly to all staff including senior leaders on any issues, successes and barriers to implementing our RAP. March, June, September, December every year Manager, Inclusion Publish an annual traffic light report against our RAP commitments, outlining achievements, challenges and learnings. July every year Manager, Inclusion Participate in Reconciliation Australia s two yearly Workplace RAP Barometer. March 2024 Manager, Inclusion Confirm our primary and secondary contact details with Reconciliation Australia to ensure we do not miss important RAP correspondence. June every year Manager, Inclusion Contact Reconciliation Australia to ask for our unique link to the online RAP Impact Measurement Questionnaire. August every year Manager, Inclusion Submit a traffic light report to Reconciliation Australia at the end of this RAP. September 2025 Manager, Inclusion Continue our reconciliation journey by developing our next RAP. Register on Reconciliation Australia s website to start developing our next RAP. January 2025 Manager, Inclusion   RECONCILIATION ACTION PLAN 2023 2026 31 Contact For all enquiries relating to the department RAP please contact Manager Inclusion Department of Industry, Science and Resources Inclusion industry.gov.au Phone 02 6243 7217  