 1 Tech Standards Security Clearance Program Guidelines About the program The Department of Industry, Science and Resources sponsors and funds Australian Government security clearances for participants involved in international technical standards setting in critical technologies. This is part of an Australian Government initiative to support industry led, consensus based approaches to developing standards increase Australia s influence in the design and use of technology standards globally ensure that critical technologies evolve in ways that align with our national interests and values. The program will give Australian experts access to security classified information. This will support their involvement in developing international technical standards for critical technologies and promote greater engagement between industry and government. Important information A person who holds an Australian Government security clearance has important legal responsibilities. They are subject to laws about disclosing Commonwealth information, and associated penalties. These include sections of the Crimes Act 1914 and the Criminal Code Act 1995. Decisions to apply for a security clearance should not be taken lightly. The security clearance process involves an initial investigation which is thorough and intrusive. The process can take many months to complete. Our department provides no commitment to timelines for any aspect of the assessment, screening and security clearance processes. If the Australian Government Security Vetting Agency AGSVA grants you a security clearance, we may contact you to provide briefings at appropriate times. We will liaise with you on the method and logistics of briefing. If you hold a clearance, this doesn t guarantee access to information. The owners of the information will determine if a person needs to receive security classified information. Our department will typically fund Negative Vetting 1 NV1 level clearances, which are valid for 10 years. We have funding until June 2026 to provide security clearances. We will only sponsor and fund one security clearance or renewal, not subsequent renewals. There are ongoing reporting requirements for clearance holders and lifelong obligations to protect information received under this program. Our sponsorship of the security clearance will stop if you no longer sit on a relevant committee become ineligible to hold a clearance for any other reason.   2 The List of Critical Technologies in the National Interest Critical technologies are current and emerging technologies with the capacity to significantly enhance or pose risk to Australia s national interest, including our economic prosperity national security social cohesion. In 2023, the Australian Government released its Critical Technologies Statement and updated List of Critical Technologies in the National Interest. The list of technologies identifies technology fields that will have a high impact on Australia s national interests and are aligned with government priorities or strategic needs. The list intends to guide future policy decision making. The 7 key enabling technology fields are advanced manufacturing and materials technologies artificial intelligence AI technologies advanced information and communication technologies quantum technologies autonomous systems, robotics, positioning, timing and sensing biotechnologies clean energy generation and storage technologies. Role of international technical standards Standards are voluntary specifications, procedures and guidelines that shape the development of new technologies. International technical standards ensure that technology products, services and systems are safe, consistent, trusted and reliable make trade easier open up new markets for Australian products and services that meet these standards. The Australian Government wants international standards for critical technologies to reflect Australia s values, innovations and expertise. Eligibility criteria We will assess eligibility for the security clearance program via the following criteria Australian based individuals participating in a Standards Development Organisation SDO committee or equivalent that is actively engaged in setting international technical standards in at least one of the 7 critical technology fields in the List of Critical Technologies in the National Interest. Applicants must provide a business case demonstrating this participation in their application. Applicants must be Australian citizens. Applicants must be aware of and agree to their ongoing obligations as a clearance holder, as outlined in this document.   3 Assessment criteria The department will have full discretion to decide whether to approve an application based on an assessment of the applicant s field of expertise, involvement in standardisation activities and any other relevant factors. Participation in this program is based on assessment by the department that there is a need for a security clearance program funding availability individual eligibility as outlined above a priority scale o priority level 1 committee chairperson and international representative o priority level 2 any other committee member. Application and assessment process 1. Application to join the program Submit your application via our online form. 2. Eligibility review We will review your application against the assessment criteria and will notify you of the status of your application. Screening and clearance process 1. Preliminary screening If your application is approved, our department s Personnel Security Team PST will then liaise with you on preliminary screening, via our online portal. We require the following information and forms at this stage Nationally Coordinated Criminal History Check Application and informed consent form. This form requires you to submit a minimum of 4 certified identity documents. Pre Employment Suitability Assessment PESA pack comprising Security Questionnaire Online form Completed Official Secrets Acknowledgement Security Clearance Privacy Statement Completed Privacy Consent Form. 2. Outcome of preliminary screening and progression to security clearance process PST will inform you of the outcome of the preliminary screening process. If successful, you will progress to the Australian Government Security Vetting Agency AGSVA security clearance process. AGSVA will contact applicants with instructions and next steps. 3. Security clearance process   4 We anticipate most clearances granted will be to NV1 level, but other clearance levels may be considered as well. AGSVA will assess an applicant s eligibility and suitability for holding a security clearance. To be eligible for an Australian Government security clearance, an individual must meet the following requirements Australian citizenship checkable background. The purpose of the security vetting process is to determine whether an individual is suitable to hold a security clearance. This means if they have and demonstrate an appropriate level of integrity. In the security context, integrity is defined as a range of character traits that indicate the individual is able to protect Australian Government information. These character traits are honesty, trustworthiness, maturity, tolerance, resilience and loyalty. 4. Personnel security checks AGSVA conducts the following external checks as part of the vetting assessment process Check Baseline NV1 NV2 PV Verification of Identity Confirmation of Australian citizenship and status of any other citizenships Background check 5 years 10 years 10 years Greater of 10 years or from the age of 16 Referee checks Digital footprint check National police check No exclusion Full exclusion Full exclusion Full exclusion Financial history check Financial statement Supporting documents required Financial probity check ASIO assessment Security interview Psychological assessment Mandatory If required by AGSVA AGSVA may ask for additional information or undertake additional checks and interviews during the vetting assessment process. They do this to resolve a security clearance decision in the interest of national security, if needed.   5 5. Assessment and decision An AGSVA vetting analyst will conduct a security clearance assessment and make a recommendation on your suitability to hold a security clearance. An officer with the appropriate delegate authority will then grant or deny an Australian Government security clearance. AGSVA will inform you of the outcome of the assessment. The assessment needs to establish confidence that you possess a sound and stable character, and that you are not unduly vulnerable to influence or coercion. The Protective Security Policy Framework requires that any doubt regarding an person s suitability to hold a security clearance be resolved in the national interest. Once you receive a security clearance Our department will maintain a list of people to whom we have granted security clearances. You must inform our department when you stop participating on a relevant committee. When your clearance stops, we may need to brief you and or ask you to sign relevant declaration of secrecy forms. If you hold a security clearance you must pre notify us of all personal and work related international travel you take, including dates and locations. A Communication Intelligence Security Officer COMSO from our department may be in touch to brief or advise you about this travel. When you return, you must notify AGSVA of your change of circumstances via their myClearance portal. You must also report other changes in personal circumstances to AGSVA. Read more about these requirements on the AGSVA website. Our department or AGSVA will provide you with more information about these reporting requirements throughout the security clearance application process. More information Please contact us at criticaltechnologystandards industry.gov.au with any questions. We may amend or update these guidelines from time to time. AGSVA may also amend or update their security clearance processes from time to time. If there is discrepancy between this document and the requirements of the department s preliminary screening and or AGSVA processes, please follow the department s preliminary screening and or AGSVA processes. Please refer to our website for the latest guidelines industry.gov.au critical technology standards Please refer to the AGSVA website for information on the security clearance process generally defence.gov.au security clearances about vetting assessment   1 Tech Standards Security Clearance Program Guidelines About the program The Department of Industry, Science and Resources sponsors and funds Australian Government security clearances for participants involved in international technical standards setting in critical technologies. This is part of an Australian Government initiative to support industry led, consensus based approaches to developing standards increase Australia s influence in the design and use of technology standards globally ensure that critical technologies evolve in ways that align with our national interests and values. The program will give Australian experts access to security classified information. This will support their involvement in developing international technical standards for critical technologies and promote greater engagement between industry and government. Important information A person who holds an Australian Government security clearance has important legal responsibilities. They are subject to laws about disclosing Commonwealth information, and associated penalties. These include sections of the Crimes Act 1914 and the Criminal Code Act 1995. Decisions to apply for a security clearance should not be taken lightly. The security clearance process involves an initial investigation which is thorough and intrusive. The process can take many months to complete. Our department provides no commitment to timelines for any aspect of the assessment, screening and security clearance processes. If the Australian Government Security Vetting Agency AGSVA grants you a security clearance, we may contact you to provide briefings at appropriate times. We will liaise with you on the method and logistics of briefing. If you hold a clearance, this doesn t guarantee access to information. The owners of the information will determine if a person needs to receive security classified information. Our department will typically fund Negative Vetting 1 NV1 level clearances, which are valid for 10 years. We have funding until June 2026 to provide security clearances. We will only sponsor and fund one security clearance or renewal, not subsequent renewals. There are ongoing reporting requirements for clearance holders and lifelong obligations to protect information received under this program. Our sponsorship of the security clearance will stop if you no longer sit on a relevant committee become ineligible to hold a clearance for any other reason.   2 The List of Critical Technologies in the National Interest Critical technologies are current and emerging technologies with the capacity to significantly enhance or pose risk to Australia s national interest, including our economic prosperity national security social cohesion. In 2023, the Australian Government released its Critical Technologies Statement and updated List of Critical Technologies in the National Interest. The list of technologies identifies technology fields that will have a high impact on Australia s national interests and are aligned with government priorities or strategic needs. The list intends to guide future policy decision making. The 7 key enabling technology fields are advanced manufacturing and materials technologies artificial intelligence AI technologies advanced information and communication technologies quantum technologies autonomous systems, robotics, positioning, timing and sensing biotechnologies clean energy generation and storage technologies. Role of international technical standards Standards are voluntary specifications, procedures and guidelines that shape the development of new technologies. International technical standards ensure that technology products, services and systems are safe, consistent, trusted and reliable make trade easier open up new markets for Australian products and services that meet these standards. The Australian Government wants international standards for critical technologies to reflect Australia s values, innovations and expertise. Eligibility criteria We will assess eligibility for the security clearance program via the following criteria Australian based individuals participating in a Standards Development Organisation SDO committee or equivalent that is actively engaged in setting international technical standards in at least one of the 7 critical technology fields in the List of Critical Technologies in the National Interest. Applicants must provide a business case demonstrating this participation in their application. Applicants must be Australian citizens. Applicants must be aware of and agree to their ongoing obligations as a clearance holder, as outlined in this document.   3 Assessment criteria The department will have full discretion to decide whether to approve an application based on an assessment of the applicant s field of expertise, involvement in standardisation activities and any other relevant factors. Participation in this program is based on assessment by the department that there is a need for a security clearance program funding availability individual eligibility as outlined above a priority scale o priority level 1 committee chairperson and international representative o priority level 2 any other committee member. Application and assessment process 1. Application to join the program Submit your application via our online form. 2. Eligibility review We will review your application against the assessment criteria and will notify you of the status of your application. Screening and clearance process 1. Preliminary screening If your application is approved, our department s Personnel Security Team PST will then liaise with you on preliminary screening, via our online portal. We require the following information and forms at this stage Nationally Coordinated Criminal History Check Application and informed consent form. This form requires you to submit a minimum of 4 certified identity documents. Pre Employment Suitability Assessment PESA pack comprising Security Questionnaire Online form Completed Official Secrets Acknowledgement Security Clearance Privacy Statement Completed Privacy Consent Form. 2. Outcome of preliminary screening and progression to security clearance process PST will inform you of the outcome of the preliminary screening process. If successful, you will progress to the Australian Government Security Vetting Agency AGSVA security clearance process. AGSVA will contact applicants with instructions and next steps. 3. Security clearance process   4 We anticipate most clearances granted will be to NV1 level, but other clearance levels may be considered as well. AGSVA will assess an applicant s eligibility and suitability for holding a security clearance. To be eligible for an Australian Government security clearance, an individual must meet the following requirements Australian citizenship checkable background. The purpose of the security vetting process is to determine whether an individual is suitable to hold a security clearance. This means if they have and demonstrate an appropriate level of integrity. In the security context, integrity is defined as a range of character traits that indicate the individual is able to protect Australian Government information. These character traits are honesty, trustworthiness, maturity, tolerance, resilience and loyalty. 4. Personnel security checks AGSVA conducts the following external checks as part of the vetting assessment process Check Baseline NV1 NV2 PV Verification of Identity Confirmation of Australian citizenship and status of any other citizenships Background check 5 years 10 years 10 years Greater of 10 years or from the age of 16 Referee checks Digital footprint check National police check No exclusion Full exclusion Full exclusion Full exclusion Financial history check Financial statement Supporting documents required Financial probity check ASIO assessment Security interview Psychological assessment Mandatory If required by AGSVA AGSVA may ask for additional information or undertake additional checks and interviews during the vetting assessment process. They do this to resolve a security clearance decision in the interest of national security, if needed.   5 5. Assessment and decision An AGSVA vetting analyst will conduct a security clearance assessment and make a recommendation on your suitability to hold a security clearance. An officer with the appropriate delegate authority will then grant or deny an Australian Government security clearance. AGSVA will inform you of the outcome of the assessment. The assessment needs to establish confidence that you possess a sound and stable character, and that you are not unduly vulnerable to influence or coercion. The Protective Security Policy Framework requires that any doubt regarding an person s suitability to hold a security clearance be resolved in the national interest. Once you receive a security clearance Our department will maintain a list of people to whom we have granted security clearances. You must inform our department when you stop participating on a relevant committee. When your clearance stops, we may need to brief you and or ask you to sign relevant declaration of secrecy forms. If you hold a security clearance you must pre notify us of all personal and work related international travel you take, including dates and locations. A Communication Intelligence Security Officer COMSO from our department may be in touch to brief or advise you about this travel. When you return, you must notify AGSVA of your change of circumstances via their myClearance portal. You must also report other changes in personal circumstances to AGSVA. Read more about these requirements on the AGSVA website. Our department or AGSVA will provide you with more information about these reporting requirements throughout the security clearance application process. More information Please contact us at criticaltechnologystandards industry.gov.au with any questions. We may amend or update these guidelines from time to time. AGSVA may also amend or update their security clearance processes from time to time. If there is discrepancy between this document and the requirements of the department s preliminary screening and or AGSVA processes, please follow the department s preliminary screening and or AGSVA processes. Please refer to our website for the latest guidelines industry.gov.au critical technology standards Please refer to the AGSVA website for information on the security clearance process generally defence.gov.au security clearances about vetting assessment 