 1 Tech Standards Training Program Guidelines About the program The Department of Industry, Science and Resources offers free training for participants involved in international technical standards setting in critical technologies. This training is part of an Australian Government initiative to support industry led, consensus based approaches to developing standards increase Australia s influence in the design and use of technology standards globally ensure that critical technologies evolve in ways that align with our national interests and values. Our department has funding until June 2026 to provide training opportunities. We will take a staged approach to training. The training will help provide additional skills and knowledge for Australian technical experts involved in international standards setting. Types of training The training will cover topics like geopolitics, international negotiation, cultural awareness and diplomacy. We aim to provide participants with a greater understanding of the geopolitical landscape in which standards are being set how standards can impact the national interest how to successfully manoeuvre and influence key decision making. Training is virtual. It may include a mix of short sessions in real time and longer sessions you can complete in your own time. We will allocate spots on each training course based on eligibility and assessment criteria. Places are limited and not guaranteed. Participants are only eligible to participate in the same training course once. List of Critical Technologies in the National Interest Critical technologies are current and emerging technologies with the capacity to significantly enhance or pose risk to Australia s national interest, including our economic prosperity national security social cohesion. In 2023, the Australian Government released its Critical Technologies Statement and updated List of Critical Technologies in the National Interest. The list of technologies identifies technology fields that will have a high impact on Australia s national interests and are aligned with government priorities or strategic needs. The list intends to guide future policy decision making.   2 The 7 key enabling technology fields are advanced manufacturing and materials technologies artificial intelligence technologies advanced information and communication technologies quantum technologies autonomous systems, robotics, positioning, timing and sensing biotechnologies clean energy generation and storage technologies. Role of international technical standards Standards are voluntary specifications, procedures and guidelines that shape the development of new technologies. International technical standards ensure that technology products, services and systems are safe, consistent, trusted and reliable make trade easier open up new markets for Australian products and services that meet these standards. The Australian Government wants international standards for critical technologies to reflect Australia s values, innovations and expertise. Eligibility criteria We will assess eligibility for the training sessions via the following criteria Australian based individuals participating in a Standards Development Organisation SDO committee or equivalent that is actively engaged in setting international technical standards in at least one of the 7 critical technology fields in the List of Critical Technologies in the National Interest. Applicants must provide a business case demonstrating this participation in their application. Assessment criteria The department will have full discretion to decide whether to approve an application based on an assessment of the applicant s field of expertise, involvement in standardisation activities and any other relevant factors. Participation in this program is based on program funding availability places available in a particular course individual eligibility as outlined above a priority scale o priority level 1 committee chairperson and international representative o priority level 2 any other committee member.   3 Application and assessment process 1. Application to join the program Submit your application via our online form. 2. Eligibility review We will review your application against the assessment criteria and will notify you of the status of your application. 3. Mailing list If we approve your application, we will add your email to a mailing list to receive information on available training. Please notify us if you are no longer participating on a relevant standards committee or if you no longer wish to receive these emails. 4. Training registration We will contact people on the mailing list with specific information about the training on offer. If you are available and interested in participating, you can request to enrol via email. We will allocate spots on each training course in line with the assessment criteria above. Please note, places are limited and not guaranteed. Training participation and evaluation Our department or the training provider will send people enrolled in training further information about how to participate in the course. We may also contact participants after the course to seek feedback. More information Please contact us at criticaltechnologystandards industry.gov.au with any questions. We may amend or update these guidelines and eligibility criteria from time to time. Please refer to our website for the latest info industry.gov.au critical technology standards   1 Tech Standards Training Program Guidelines About the program The Department of Industry, Science and Resources offers free training for participants involved in international technical standards setting in critical technologies. This training is part of an Australian Government initiative to support industry led, consensus based approaches to developing standards increase Australia s influence in the design and use of technology standards globally ensure that critical technologies evolve in ways that align with our national interests and values. Our department has funding until June 2026 to provide training opportunities. We will take a staged approach to training. The training will help provide additional skills and knowledge for Australian technical experts involved in international standards setting. Types of training The training will cover topics like geopolitics, international negotiation, cultural awareness and diplomacy. We aim to provide participants with a greater understanding of the geopolitical landscape in which standards are being set how standards can impact the national interest how to successfully manoeuvre and influence key decision making. Training is virtual. It may include a mix of short sessions in real time and longer sessions you can complete in your own time. We will allocate spots on each training course based on eligibility and assessment criteria. Places are limited and not guaranteed. Participants are only eligible to participate in the same training course once. List of Critical Technologies in the National Interest Critical technologies are current and emerging technologies with the capacity to significantly enhance or pose risk to Australia s national interest, including our economic prosperity national security social cohesion. In 2023, the Australian Government released its Critical Technologies Statement and updated List of Critical Technologies in the National Interest. The list of technologies identifies technology fields that will have a high impact on Australia s national interests and are aligned with government priorities or strategic needs. The list intends to guide future policy decision making.   2 The 7 key enabling technology fields are advanced manufacturing and materials technologies artificial intelligence technologies advanced information and communication technologies quantum technologies autonomous systems, robotics, positioning, timing and sensing biotechnologies clean energy generation and storage technologies. Role of international technical standards Standards are voluntary specifications, procedures and guidelines that shape the development of new technologies. International technical standards ensure that technology products, services and systems are safe, consistent, trusted and reliable make trade easier open up new markets for Australian products and services that meet these standards. The Australian Government wants international standards for critical technologies to reflect Australia s values, innovations and expertise. Eligibility criteria We will assess eligibility for the training sessions via the following criteria Australian based individuals participating in a Standards Development Organisation SDO committee or equivalent that is actively engaged in setting international technical standards in at least one of the 7 critical technology fields in the List of Critical Technologies in the National Interest. Applicants must provide a business case demonstrating this participation in their application. Assessment criteria The department will have full discretion to decide whether to approve an application based on an assessment of the applicant s field of expertise, involvement in standardisation activities and any other relevant factors. Participation in this program is based on program funding availability places available in a particular course individual eligibility as outlined above a priority scale o priority level 1 committee chairperson and international representative o priority level 2 any other committee member.   3 Application and assessment process 1. Application to join the program Submit your application via our online form. 2. Eligibility review We will review your application against the assessment criteria and will notify you of the status of your application. 3. Mailing list If we approve your application, we will add your email to a mailing list to receive information on available training. Please notify us if you are no longer participating on a relevant standards committee or if you no longer wish to receive these emails. 4. Training registration We will contact people on the mailing list with specific information about the training on offer. If you are available and interested in participating, you can request to enrol via email. We will allocate spots on each training course in line with the assessment criteria above. Please note, places are limited and not guaranteed. Training participation and evaluation Our department or the training provider will send people enrolled in training further information about how to participate in the course. We may also contact participants after the course to seek feedback. More information Please contact us at criticaltechnologystandards industry.gov.au with any questions. We may amend or update these guidelines and eligibility criteria from time to time. Please refer to our website for the latest info industry.gov.au critical technology standards 