 User Guide for Jobs Act Compliance Reports Version 2.1 June 2020 Australian Jobs Act 2013 User Guide for Compliance Reports June 2020 This user guide is for project proponents and facility operators reporting on implementation of their Australian Industry Participation plan under the Australian Jobs Act 2013.   User Guide for Jobs Act Compliance Reports Version 2.1 June 2020 2 Table of Contents About this User Guide 3 AIP plan compliance reporting. 4 Reporting Period 4 Record Keeping 4 How to complete the Compliance Report templates 5 Submitting a Compliance Report 5 Evaluation of Compliance Reports 5 Information gathering powers 6 Consequences of Non compliance 6 Completing the Compliance Report template Project Phase 7 Australian Industry Participation 7 AIP Plan implementation 7 Promotion of AIP plan and or Australian suppliers 12 Upcoming AIP Activities 11 Procurement of Key Goods and Services 12 Sourcing decisions during the period 12 Supplier Performance 14 Ongoing Commitment Summary 14 Adjustments to Previously Reported Project Commitments 15 Forecast Major Contracts 14 Completing the Compliance Report template Operations Phase 15 Australian Industry Participation 15 AIP Plan implementation 15 Promotion of AIP plan and or Australian suppliers 19 Upcoming AIP Activities 19 Procurement of Key Goods and Services 19 Sourcing decisions during the period 19 Supplier Performance 21 Ongoing Commitment Summary 21 Adjustments to Previously Reported Project Commitments 22 Forecast Major Contracts 22 Key Concepts and Definitions 23   User Guide for Jobs Act Compliance Reports Version 2.1 June 2020 3 About this User Guide The User Guide for Compliance Reports provides guidance on reporting on the implementation of an Australian Industry Participation AIP plan for project proponents and facility operators under the Australian Jobs Act 2013 the Act . The key objective of Part B of an AIP plan for a major project is that Australian entities should have full, fair and reasonable opportunity to bid for the supply of key goods or services for the project. The key objective of Part C of an AIP plan for a major project is that Australian entities should have full, fair and reasonable opportunity to bid for the supply of key goods or services for the new facility s initial operational phase first two years . The Compliance Reports provide details on how the AIP plan is being implemented to provide Australian entities with full, fair and reasonable opportunity to participate in the project or the new facility. The Compliance Report templates have been developed in accordance with the Australian Jobs Australian Industry Participation Rule 2014 and the AIP plan rules in the Act and must be used when completing a compliance report. Project proponents are encouraged to contact the AIP Authority early in the development of a project s first Compliance Report for advice and assistance. When preparing a Compliance Report project proponents and facility operators must use the most recent approved Compliance Report templates available at Project proponents complete the Compliance report template Project phase. Facility operators complete the Compliance report template Operations phase. For further guidance on completing Compliance Reports, contact the AIP Authority by Email aip industry.gov.au Phone 61 2 6213 6404   User Guide for Jobs Act Compliance Reports Version 2.1 June 2020 4 AIP plan compliance reporting It is a requirement of the Act that as long as an approved AIP plan is in force, project proponents for a major project must comply with Part B of the AIP plan and facility operators must comply with Part C of the AIP plan. A Compliance Report documents the actions and activities that project proponents and facility operators have undertaken to comply with the approved AIP plan and ensure their procurement entities have complied. Procurement entities are those entities engaged by the project proponent or facility operator to provide engineering, procurement and construction management EPC M services and or tier one head contractors for the project or facility. The Compliance Report should show how full, fair and reasonable opportunity was provided to include capable Australian entities in the project and the new facility. The outcomes that were achieved as a result of the implementation of the AIP plan should be documented in the Compliance Report. Evidence of the actions and outcomes should be provided as attachments. Reporting Period The nominated project proponent must submit a Compliance Report for each six month period or part thereof commencing on the day that the AIP plan is approved until the project is completed. The date by which a Compliance Report must be given to the AIP Authority is within three months after the end of each six month reporting period. The table below illustrates this for a project where the AIP plan was approved on 10 January 2019 and the project was completed on 30 May 2020 AIP plan approved Start first reporting period End first reporting period First report due 10 January 2019 10 January 2019 9 July 2019 9 October 2019 Start second reporting period End second reporting period Second report due 10 July 2019 9 January 2020 9 April 2020 Project completed Start third reporting period End third reporting period Third report due 30 May 2020 10 January 2020 30 May 2020 30 August 2020 The AIP Authority may, by written notice to the project proponent, determine a longer or shorter reporting period for a project. This may apply when a project is experiencing significant delays that affect the implementation of AIP plan activities. Project proponents may contact the AIP Authority if this occurs to extend the reporting period. Project proponents should not wait until the end of a reporting period to contact the AIP Authority.   User Guide for Jobs Act Compliance Reports Version 2.1 June 2020 5 Where a project will establish a new eligible facility, the nominated facility operator must submit a Compliance Report for each six month period commencing on the day procurement activity for the initial operations of the facility commences. The date by which a Compliance Report must be given to the AIP Authority is within three months after the end of each six month reporting period. A facility operator must continue to provide Compliance Reports up to and during the two year initial operational period in which an AIP plan remains in force. Compliance reporting is not required after the expiry of the two year period. The table below illustrates this where the AIP plan for the project was approved on 10 January 2019, operations procurement activity started on 1 January 2020 and the new facility commenced operations on 1 June 2020 Operations procurement activity starts Start first operations reporting period End first operations reporting period First operations report due 1 January 2020 1 January 2020 30 June 2020 30 September 2020 New facility commences operations Start second operations reporting period End second reporting period Second report due 1 June 2020 1 July 2020 31 December 2020 31 March 2021 Start third operations reporting period End third reporting period Third report due 1 January 2021 30 June 2021 30 September 2021 Start fourth operations reporting period End fourth reporting period Fourth report due 1 July 2021 31 December 2021 31 March 2022 Start fifth operations reporting period End fifth reporting period Fifth report due 1 January 2022 30 May 2022 30 August 2022 Two years after facility commenced operations As project proponents and facility operators report separately there may be an overlapping period when project phase and operations phase compliance reports are both required. Record Keeping The nominated project proponent for a major project must keep such records as are reasonably necessary to enable the AIP Authority to ascertain compliance with Part B of the AIP plan. Such records must be kept for a minimum period of five years after project completion.   User Guide for Jobs Act Compliance Reports Version 2.1 June 2020 6 The nominated operator of a new facility must keep such records as are reasonably necessary to enable the AIP Authority to ascertain compliance with Part C of the AIP plan. Such records must be kept for a minimum period of five years after the expiry of the initial operational period. How to complete the Compliance Report templates Project proponents and facility operators should complete the compliance report templates by reading each question then selecting the appropriate response and or providing more information where indicated. Evidence of AIP actions and outcomes should be included as numbered attachments to the completed template. A number of questions in the templates require confirmation that information provided in the approved AIP plan is still current. Project proponents and facility operators should refer to their approved AIP plan when answering these questions and if changes to the information have occurred provide details in the templates where indicated. Where changes have already been reported in a previous compliance report it is not necessary to report them again in subsequent reports. The AIP Authority will advise project proponents or facility operators if the changes require the AIP plan summaries for the project or facility to be updated. Further information on responding to each question in the compliance report templates is available from page 7 of this User Guide. Submitting a Compliance Report Completed Compliance Reports with evidence attached must be submitted to the AIP Authority by the due date through Email aip industry.gov.au preferred method Mail AIP Authority GPO Box 2013 CANBERRA ACT 2601 When emailing the report, if you do not receive confirmation of receipt within two business days contact the AIP Authority on 02 6213 6404 to determine if the email was received. If there is an unexpected delay to the submission of a compliance report, project proponents or facility operators should contact the AIP Authority before the due date to request an extension. Evaluation of Compliance Reports Submitted Compliance Reports will be reviewed by the AIP Authority to ensure that they contain sufficient information that the AIP plan is being properly implemented. A Compliance Report will only be acceptable if it is completed correctly and evidence is provided that the AIP plan has been implemented. When a Compliance Report is incomplete or does not provide sufficient evidence that the AIP plan has been implemented, advice will be provided to the project proponent or facility operator of any additional information required. Project proponents and facility operators   User Guide for Jobs Act Compliance Reports Version 2.1 June 2020 7 should respond promptly with the additional information. If the additional information is not received or is unsatisfactory the AIP Authority may use its information gathering powers or undertake non compliance actions. Information gathering powers The AIP Authority has a range of information gathering powers to ensure compliance with the Act. These powers are able to be exercised in circumstances where the AIP Authority believes on reasonable grounds that a project proponent or facility operator has information or documents relevant to the operation of the Act. The powers are detailed in Part 4 Information gathering powers of the Act. Consequences of Non compliance The AIP Authority will actively take steps to ensure project proponents and facility operators comply with their obligations under the Act. Consequences for project proponents and facility operators who fail to comply with the Act include Requiring the project proponent or facility operator to publish on their website a notice detailing their non compliance with the Act or Naming non compliant project proponents or facility operators in the AIP Authority s annual report or by other ways deemed by the AIP Authority or Seeking an injunction against the project proponents or facility operators. These consequences are detailed in Part 5 Consequences of non compliance of the Act.   User Guide for Jobs Act Compliance Reports Version 2.1 June 2020 8 Completing the Compliance Report template Project phase The following information will assist project proponents reporting on implementation of Part B of their approved AIP plan to complete the Compliance Report template Project phase. Title page Insert the Project name. Insert the Project registration number as provided by the AIP Authority. Select the Report period start date and end date as advised by the AIP Authority. Compliance Report Declaration The Compliance Report Declaration will need to be signed by an authorised person within the project proponent prior to submission of the Compliance Report. Proponent Details Confirm if the project proponent s details in A.1 of the approved AIP plan are still current. These include proponent name s , ABN s , ACN s , contact person and contact details. If there have been any changes to the details include the new details in the text box. Project Update Provide an update on the progress of the project for the reporting period. For example achievement of approvals, appointment of procurement entities, an update on design or construction, the number of workers involved or if there have been any delays. Project proponents may also provide an indication of the expected progression over the next reporting period. Do not include information about AIP activities here. If there have been any changes to the project details in A.2 of the approved AIP plan include information about the changes in the text box. For example changes in project location, estimated project value, project type, project description or estimated completion date. Australian Industry Participation AIP plan implementation Provide responses on how you implemented each section of Part B of your AIP plan for the project during the reporting period. References to you in the template and this User Guide refer to the nominated project proponent. Select the appropriate response box and or provide information in the text box where indicated. You will need to attach evidence to support your responses where indicated. Examples of evidence are provided but you may provide different evidence to the examples. Where you are acting as the procurement entity for the project, provide information on what you have done against the relevant sections that refer to procurement entities.   User Guide for Jobs Act Compliance Reports Version 2.1 June 2020 9 If you have not undertaken any AIP plan implementation activities during the reporting period provide reasons in the text box such as significant project delays. You should still provide a brief response to each subsequent question. B.1.1 Project contact officer for supplier enquiries details Are the project contact officer for supplier enquiries details as in B.1.1 of your AIP plan still current Select Yes or No . If you select No provide the new details in the text box. If you have previously advised changes to the details and these changes are still current, select Yes . If you have previously advised changes to the details and these changes are no longer current, select No and provide the new details in the text box. B.1.2 AIP plan Part B implementation officer details Are the AIP plan Part B implementation officer details as in B.1.2 of your AIP plan still current Select Yes or No . If you select No provide the new details in the text box. If you have previously advised changes to the details and these changes are still current, select Yes . If you have previously advised changes to the details and these changes are no longer current, select No and provide the new details in the text box. B.1.3 Procurement entity contact officer Enter information on how you ensured your procurement entities appointed contact officers and published their details as described in B.1.3 of your AIP plan. If you are acting as the procurement entity for the project, insert Not applicable . B.2.1 List of key goods and services Is the list of key goods and services as in B.2.1 of your AIP plan still current Select Yes or No . If you select No provide details of changes to the list in the text box. If you have previously advised changes to the list and these changes are still current, select Yes . If you have previously advised changes to the list and these changes are no longer current, select No and provide the new details in the text box. B.2.2 Explanation for no opportunities for Australian entities Are the explanations as in B.2.2 of your AIP plan still current Select Yes or No . If you select No provide details of changes to the explanations in the text box. If your AIP plan does not include explanations, select Not applicable . If you have previously advised changes to the explanations and these changes are still current, select Yes . If you have previously advised changes to the explanations and these changes are no longer current, select No and provide the new details in the text box. B.2.3 Maintain understanding of capability of Australian entities Enter information on how you ensured procurement entities obtained and or maintained understanding of Australian entities capability as detailed in B.2.3 of your AIP plan. If you are acting as the procurement entity for the project, enter information on how you undertook this action.   User Guide for Jobs Act Compliance Reports Version 2.1 June 2020 10 Attach evidence such as a vendor identification agency contract. B.2.4 Project standards Enter information on how you ensured the project standards detailed in B.2.4 of your AIP plan were implemented and or maintained across the project. If you are acting as the procurement entity for the project, enter information on how you undertook this action. Attach evidence such as procurement package information showing applicable standards. B.3.1 Proponent project website Is the proponent project website as in B.3.1 of your AIP plan still current Select Yes or No . If you select No provide the new details in the text box. If you have previously advised changes to the website and these changes are still current, select Yes . If you have previously advised changes to the website and these changes are no longer current, select No and provide the new details in the text box. Attach evidence such as website screenshots. B.3.2 Project opportunities website Is the project opportunities website as in B.3.2 of your AIP plan still current Select Yes or No . If you select No provide the new details in the text box. If you have previously advised changes to the website and these changes are still current, select Yes . If you have previously advised changes to the website and these changes are no longer current, select No and provide the new details in the text box. Attach evidence such as website screenshots. B.3.3 Procurement entity website Enter information on how you ensured procurement entities published on a public website the information as required in B.3.3 of your AIP plan. If you are acting as the procurement entity for the project, enter information on how you undertook this action. B.4.1 Communication actions Enter information on how you undertook the engagement and communication actions detailed in B.4.1 of your AIP plan. Attach evidence such as supplier briefing presentations. B.4.2 AIP training Enter information on how you undertook the AIP training activities detailed in B.4.2 of your AIP plan.   User Guide for Jobs Act Compliance Reports Version 2.1 June 2020 11 Attach evidence such as AIP training material. B.4.3 Pre qualification requirements Enter information on how you ensured procurement entities published their pre qualification requirements as detailed in B.4.3 of your AIP plan. If you are acting as the procurement entity for the project, enter information on how you undertook this action. B.4.4 Equal bid timeframes Enter information on how you ensured procurement entities provided equal timeframes for all entities to respond to requests for bids on the project as detailed in B.4.4 of the AIP plan. If you are acting as the procurement entity for the project, enter information on how you undertook this action. Attach evidence such as tender information. B.5.1 Australian entity capability and capacity development Enter information on how you undertook the supplier development activities detailed in B.5.1 of your AIP plan and any outcomes achieved for Australian entities. Attach evidence of supplier development activities. B.5.2 Global supply chain integration Enter information on how you undertook the supplier integration activities detailed in B.5.2 of your AIP plan and any outcomes achieved for Australian entities. Attach evidence of supplier integration activities. B.5.3 Feedback to Australian entities Enter information on how you ensured procurement entities provided feedback to unsuccessful Australian entities as detailed in B.5.3 of your AIP plan. If you are acting as the procurement entity for the project, enter information on how you undertook this action. Attach evidence such as feedback invitation letters. B.6.1 Records and evidence Have you collected the records and evidence of your AIP implementation activities as detailed in B.6.1 of your AIP plan Select Yes or No . If you select No provide a reason in the text box. It is important to retain evidence of implementation of your AIP plan. The AIP Authority may ask for confirmation that you will collect evidence in the next reporting period.   User Guide for Jobs Act Compliance Reports Version 2.1 June 2020 12 B.6.2 Procedures and resources Are the procedures and resources to support your implementation of the AIP plan as detailed in B.6.2 still current Select Yes or No . If you select No provide details of changes to the procedures and resources in the text box. If you have previously advised changes to the procedures and resources and these changes are still current, select Yes . If you have previously advised changes and these changes are no longer current, select No and provide the new details in the text box. B.6.3 Procurement entity compliance Enter information on the steps you undertook to ensure your procurement entities complied with the AIP plan as detailed in B.6.3 of your AIP plan. Attach evidence such as AIP contract clauses. Promotion of AIP plan and or Australian suppliers If, during the reporting period, you and or your procurement entities have prepared any case studies, press releases or publications that support the information provided in achieving your AIP plan obligations details should be provided. Upcoming AIP Activities Provide details on any upcoming AIP activities that you and or your procurement entities plan to undertake during the next six months. This may include any supplier briefings, newsletters, seminars, overseas supplier visits etc. Procurement of Key Goods and Services Sourcing decisions during the period In this table project proponents should list all the key goods and services 1 million and above that were acquired for the project during the reporting period. This includes items acquired by the project proponent and its procurement entities. List the key goods and services that were acquired including a description of the goods or services acquired the standards if any that apply to the goods or services acquired the name and location of the entity awarded the contract the name of the procurement entity responsible for acquiring the goods or services the contract value category of the contract to acquire the goods and services the percentage of Australian content of the goods or services acquired if the entity was not an Australian entity the reason why an Australian entity was not successful and is the winning bidder new to your or your procurement entity s supply chain. Australian content means the value of work to be performed in Australia under the contract Australian entity means any entity with an ABN or ACN   User Guide for Jobs Act Compliance Reports Version 2.1 June 2020 13 Below is an example of the information to be provided on the procurement of key goods and services during the reporting period where the project proponent is Mega Project Pty Ltd Contract description Standard used Name and Location of winning bidder Procurement entity Category of contract Percent Australian content Comment on why an Australian entity was not successful Is the winning bidder new to your supply chain Mine power design services Australian XC Design Services, NT Mega Project Pty Ltd A 100 N A Yes Ore processing plant design and construct Australian Major Engineering Pty Ltd, WA Mega Project Pty Ltd C 65 N A No Supply of ball mills European Global Mills, Sweden Major Engineering Pty Ltd B 10 Suitable ball mills not made in Australia No Steel fabrication Australian XY Fabricators, NSW Major Engineering Pty Ltd B 100 N A Yes Mobile mining equipment Australian Mining Equipment USA Pty Ltd, NSW Mega Project Pty Ltd D 10 Purchased through Australian subsidiary of US maker No Category of contract Category Contract value A Contracts 1 million 5 million B Contracts 5 million 25 million C Contracts 25 million 100 million D Contracts 100 million 500 million E Contracts 500 million   User Guide for Jobs Act Compliance Reports Version 2.1 June 2020 14 Supplier Performance Provide details of any strengths and weaknesses of Australian entities capability and or capacity and competitiveness you have identified through undertaking the project. This information will help the AIP Authority to work with government agencies and Australian entities to improve the capability and competitiveness of Australian entities. The information that you could provide in relation to Australian entities includes meeting pre qualification requirements quality of tender responses pricing delivery timeframes quality of product capacity to supply Ongoing Commitment Summary This table records the ongoing value of all commitments made by the project proponent up to the start of the reporting period and during the reporting period itself. Project proponents should provide the cumulative value of all the contracts they have awarded to Australian entities and non Australian entities for the project during the reporting period. This includes contracts valued at less than 1 million. Include the total value of each contract even if payments will be made in instalments over subsequent reporting periods. Do not include the value of contracts awarded by your procurement entities. This will avoid double counting the value of commitments such as when a proponent awards a contract to a procurement entity which then uses those contract funds to award contracts to lower tier suppliers . You may show the cumulative value of your procurement entity s commitments in a separate table. Below shows how the Ongoing Commitment Summary table should be completed over two consecutive reporting periods for a project where the AIP plan was approved on 1 January 2019.   User Guide for Jobs Act Compliance Reports Version 2.1 June 2020 15 Completing the initial Commitment Summary table for reporting period 1 January 30 June 2019 where the proponent has awarded contracts totaling 155 million to Australian and 90 million to non Australian entities Commitments AUD Million Period Total Australian entities Non Australian entities Cumulative to 31 December 2018 0 0 0 Reporting period Commitments 1 January 2019 to 30 June 2019 245 155 90 Cumulative to 30 June 2019 245 155 90 Completing the subsequent Commitment Summary table for reporting period 1 July 31 December 2019 where the proponent has awarded contracts totaling 514 million to Australian and 365 million to non Australian entities Commitments AUD Million Period Total Australian entities Non Australian entities Cumulative to 30 June 2019 245 155 90 Reporting period Commitments 1 July 2019 to 31 December 2019 879 514 365 Cumulative to 31 December 2019 1124 669 455 Adjustments to Previously Reported Project Commitments If there have been revisions to previously reported cumulative totals in the Ongoing Commitment Summary, project proponents can provide details of the revisions. This could include changes to contract values and or location of the entity awarded the contract e.g. contract award to non Australian entity cancelled and awarded to Australian entity instead .   User Guide for Jobs Act Compliance Reports Version 2.1 June 2020 16 Forecast Major Contracts Project proponents should provide details on any major contracts that may be awarded by the proponent or its procurement entities within the next reporting period. Project proponents should include a brief description of the contracts, the anticipated contract value categories and the likely supplier locations.   User Guide for Jobs Act Compliance Reports Version 2.1 June 2020 17 Completing the Compliance Report template Operations phase The following information will assist facility operators reporting on implementation of Part C of their approved AIP plan to complete the Compliance Report template Operations phase. Title page Insert the Project name. Insert the Project registration number as provided by the AIP Authority. Select the Report period start date and end date as advised by the AIP Authority. Compliance Report Declaration The Compliance Report Declaration will need to be signed and dated by an authorised person within the operator prior to submission of the Compliance Report. C.1 Operator Details Confirm if the operator s details in C.1 of the approved AIP plan are still current. These include operator name s , ABN s , ACN s , contact person and contact details. If there have been any changes to the details include the new details in the text box. Facility Update Provide an update on the facility for the reporting period, for example the initial commissioning or subsequent operations. Operators may also provide an indication of the expected progression over the next reporting period. Do not include information about AIP activities here. Australian Industry Participation AIP plan implementation Provide responses on how you implemented each section of Part C of your AIP plan for the facility during the reporting period. References to you in the template and this User Guide refer to the nominated operator. Select the appropriate response box and or provide information in the text box where indicated. You will need to attach evidence to support your responses where indicated. Examples of evidence are provided but you may provide different evidence to the examples. Where you are acting as the procurement entity for the facility, provide information on what you have done against the relevant sections that refer to procurement entities. If you have not undertaken any AIP plan implementation activities during the reporting period provide reasons in the text box such as procurement completed. You should still provide a brief response to each subsequent question.   User Guide for Jobs Act Compliance Reports Version 2.1 June 2020 18 C.2.1 Operator s contact officer for supplier enquiries details Are the operator s contact officer for supplier enquiries details as in C.2.1 of your plan still current Select Yes or No . If you select No provide the new details in the text box. If you have previously advised changes to the details and these changes are still current, select Yes . If you have previously advised changes to the details and these changes are no longer current, select No and provide the new details in the text box. C.2.2 AIP plan Part C implementation officer details Are the AIP plan Part C implementation officer details as in C.2.2 of your AIP plan still current Select Yes or No . If you select No provide the new details in the text box. If you have previously advised changes to the details and these changes are still current, select Yes . If you have previously advised changes to the details and these changes are no longer current, select No and provide the new details in the text box. C.2.3 Procurement entity contact officer Enter information on how you ensured your procurement entities appoint contact officers and publish their details as described in C.2.3 of your AIP plan. If you are acting as the procurement entity for the facility, insert Not applicable . C.3.1 List of key goods and services Is the list of key goods and services as in C.3.1 of your AIP plan still current Select Yes or No . If you select No provide details of changes to the list in the text box. If you have previously advised changes to the list and these changes are still current, select Yes . If you have previously advised changes to the list and these changes are no longer current, select No and provide the new details in the text box. C.3.2 Explanation for no opportunities for Australian entities Are the explanations as in C.3.2 of your AIP plan still current Select Yes or No . If you select No provide details of changes to the explanations in the text box. If your AIP plan does not include explanations, select Not applicable . If you have previously advised changes to the explanations and these changes are still current, select Yes . If you have previously advised changes to the explanations and these changes are no longer current, select No and provide the new details in the text box. C.3.3 Maintain understanding of capability of Australian entities Enter information on how you ensured procurement entities obtained and or maintained understanding of Australian entities capability as detailed in C.3.3 of your AIP plan. If you are acting as the procurement entity for the facility, enter information on how you undertook this action.   User Guide for Jobs Act Compliance Reports Version 2.1 June 2020 19 Attach evidence such as a vendor identification agency contract. C.3.4 Project standards Enter information on how you ensured the facility standards detailed in C.3.4 of your AIP plan were implemented and or maintained across the facility. If you are acting as the procurement entity for the facility, enter information on how you undertook this action. Attach evidence such as procurement package information showing applicable standards. C.4.1 Operator facility website Is the operator facility website as in C.4.1 of your AIP plan still current Select Yes or No . If you select No provide the new details in the text box. If you have previously advised changes to the website and these changes are still current, select Yes . If you have previously advised changes to the website and these changes are no longer current, select No and provide the new details in the text box. Attach evidence such as website screenshots. C.4.2 Operational opportunities website Is the operational opportunities website as in C.4.2 of your AIP plan still current Select Yes or No . If you select No provide the new details in the text box. If you have previously advised changes to the website and these changes are still current, select Yes . If you have previously advised changes to the website and these changes are no longer current, select No and provide the new details in the text box. C.4.3 Procurement entity website Enter information on how you ensured procurement entities published on a public website the information as required in C.4.3 of your AIP plan. If you are acting as the procurement entity for the facility, enter information on how you undertook this action. C.5.1 Communication actions Enter information on how you undertook the engagement and communication actions detailed in C.5.1 of your AIP plan. Attach evidence such as supplier briefing presentations. C.5.2 AIP training Enter information on how you undertook the AIP training activities detailed in C.5.2 of your AIP plan.   User Guide for Jobs Act Compliance Reports Version 2.1 June 2020 20 Attach evidence such as AIP training material. C.5.3 Pre qualification requirements Enter information on how you ensured procurement entities published their pre qualification requirements as detailed in C.5.3 of your AIP plan. If you are acting as the procurement entity for the facility, enter information on how you undertook this action. C.5.4 Equal bid timeframes Enter information on how you ensured procurement entities provided equal timeframes for all entities to respond to requests for bids on the facility as detailed in C.5.4 of your AIP plan. If you are acting as the procurement entity for the facility, enter information on how you undertook this action. Attach evidence such as tender information. C.6.1 Australian entity capability and capacity development Enter information on how you undertook the supplier development activities detailed in C.6.1 of your AIP plan and any outcomes achieved for Australian entities. Attach evidence of supplier development activities. C.6.2 Global supply chain integration Enter information on how you undertook the supplier integration activities detailed in C.6.2 of your AIP plan and any outcomes achieved for Australian entities. Attach evidence of supplier integration activities. C.6.3 Feedback to Australian entities Enter information on how you ensured procurement entities provided feedback to unsuccessful Australian entities as detailed in C.6.3 of your AIP plan. If you are acting as the procurement entity for the facility, enter information on how you undertook this action. Attach evidence such as feedback invitation letters. C.7.1 Records and evidence Have you collected the records and evidence in support of your AIP implementation activities as detailed in C.7.1 of your AIP plan Select Yes or No . If you select No provide a reason in the text box. It is important to retain evidence of implementation of your AIP plan. The AIP Authority may ask for confirmation that you will collect evidence in the next reporting period.   User Guide for Jobs Act Compliance Reports Version 2.1 June 2020 21 C.7.2 Procedures and resources Are the procedures and resources to support your implementation of the AIP plan as detailed in C.7.2 still current Select Yes or No . If you select No provide details of changes to the resources in the text box. If you have previously advised changes to the procedures and resources and these changes are still current, select Yes . If you have previously advised changes and these changes are no longer current, select No and provide the new details in the text box. C.7.3 Procurement entity compliance Enter information on the steps you undertook to ensure your procurement entities complied with the AIP plan as detailed in C.7.3 of your AIP plan. Attach evidence such as AIP contract clauses. Promotion of AIP plan and or Australian suppliers If, during the reporting period, you and or your procurement entities have prepared any case studies, press releases or publications that support the information provided in achieving your AIP plan obligations details should be provided. Upcoming AIP Activities Provide details on any upcoming AIP activities that you and or your procurement entities plan to undertake during the next reporting period. This may include any supplier briefings, newsletters, seminars, overseas supplier visits etc. Procurement of Key Goods and Services Sourcing decisions during the period In this table operators should list all the key goods and services 1 million and above that were acquired for the facility during the reporting period. This includes items acquired by the operator and its procurement entities. List the key goods and services that were acquired including a description of the goods or services acquired the standards if any that apply to the goods or services acquired the name and location of the entity awarded the contract the name of the procurement entity if any responsible for acquiring the goods or services the contract value category of the contract to acquire the goods and services the percentage of Australian content of the goods or services acquired if the entity was not an Australian entity the reason why an Australian entity was not successful and is the winning bidder new to your or your procurement entity s supply chain. Australian content means the value of work to be performed in Australia under the contract Australian entity means any entity with an ABN or ACN   User Guide for Jobs Act Compliance Reports Version 2.1 June 2020 22 Below is an example of the information to be provided on the procurement of key goods and services during the reporting period where the operator is Retail Mall Operations Pty Ltd Contract description Standard used Name and Location of winning bidder Procurement entity Category of contract Per cent Australian content Comment on why an Australian entity was not successful Is the winning bidder new to your supply chain Cleaning services Australian Brightstar Cleaning, NSW Retail Mall Operations Pty Ltd A 100 N A Yes Property maintenance services Australian Fixed Pty Ltd, NSW Retail Mall Operations Pty Ltd B 85 N A No Security services Australian Protect Pty Ltd, QLD Retail Mall Operations Pty Ltd B 100 N A No Mall furniture Australian Seat Supplies, Thailand Retail Mall Operations Pty Ltd A 10 Australian suppliers not competitive Yes Category of contract Category Contract value A Contracts 1 million 5 million B Contracts 5 million 25 million C Contracts 25 million 100 million D Contracts 100 million 500 million E Contracts 500 million   User Guide for Jobs Act Compliance Reports Version 2.1 June 2020 23 Supplier Performance Provide details of any strengths and weaknesses of Australian entities capability and or capacity and competitiveness you have identified through operating the facility. This information will help the AIP Authority to work with Government agencies and Australian entities to improve the capability and competitiveness of Australian entities. The information that you could provide in relation to Australian entities includes meeting pre qualification requirements quality of tender responses pricing delivery timeframes quality of product capacity to supply Ongoing Commitment Summary This table records the ongoing value of all commitments made by the operator up to the start of the reporting period and during the reporting period itself. Operators should provide the cumulative value of all the contracts they have awarded to Australian entities and non Australian entities for the facility during the reporting period. This includes contracts valued at less than 1 million. Include the total value of each contract even if payments will be made in instalments over subsequent reporting periods. Do not include the value of contracts awarded by your procurement entities during the reporting period. This will avoid double counting the value of commitments such as when an operator awards a contract to a procurement entity which then uses those contract funds to award contracts to lower tier suppliers . You may show the cumulative value of your procurement entity s commitments in a separate table. Below shows how the Ongoing Commitment Summary table should be completed over two consecutive reporting periods for a facility that commenced procurement for the operations phase on 1 January 2020. Completing the initial Commitment Summary table for reporting period 1 January 30 June 2020 where the operator has awarded contracts totaling 40 million to Australian and 5 million to non Australian entities Commitments AUD Million Period Total Australian entities Non Australian entities Cumulative to 31 December 2019 0 0 0 Reporting period Commitments 45 40 5   User Guide for Jobs Act Compliance Reports Version 2.1 June 2020 24 Commitments AUD Million 1 January 2020 to 30 June 2020 Cumulative to 30 June 2020 45 40 5 Completing the subsequent Commitment Summary table for reporting period 1 July 31 December 2020 where the operator has awarded contracts totaling 8 million to Australian and 1 million to non Australian entities Commitments AUD Million Period Total Australian entities Non Australian entities Cumulative to 30 June 2020 45 40 5 Reporting period Commitments 1 July 2020 to 31 December 2020 9 8 1 Cumulative to 31 December 2020 54 48 6 Adjustments to Previously Reported Project Commitments If there have been revisions to previously reported cumulative totals in the Ongoing Commitment Summary, operators can provide details of the revisions. This could include changes to contract values and or location of the entity awarded the contract e.g. contract award to non Australian entity cancelled and awarded to Australian entity instead . Forecast Major Contracts Operators should provide details on any major contracts that may be awarded by the operator or its procurement entities within the next reporting period. Operators should provide a brief description of the contracts, the anticipated contract value categories and the likely supplier locations.   User Guide for Jobs Act Compliance Reports Version 2.1 June 2020 25 Key Concepts and Definitions In the definitions below person refers to a company or organisation as defined by the Corporations Act 2001. Approved AIP plan Means an approved AIP plan under section 18, 19 or 20 of the Australian Jobs Act 2013. Australian entity Any entity with an ABN or an ACN. Entity Has the same meaning as in the A New Tax System Australian Business Number Act 1999. Key goods or services Means goods or services valued at AUD1 million or more. Goods and services are key goods and services if, and only if, the goods or services are for use, wholly or partly, in connection with carrying out the project of the operation of a new facility during the two year initial operation phase. Non Australian entity Means an entity other than an Australian entity. Operator An entity which has day to day management and control of the facility and its activities. Procurement entity Includes an Engineering, Procurement and Construction Management EPC M company or tier 1 head contractor making procurement decisions for key goods and services on behalf of the project or facility. A procurement entity does not include sub contractors which are responsible for supplying goods and services to a project or facility rather than purchasing key goods or services. Project proponent Is the entity responsible for carrying out the project. 