 EN EN EUROPEAN COMMISSION Brussels, 26.2.2016 COM 2016 87 final COMMUNICATION FROM THE COMMISSION TO THE EUROPEAN PARLIAMENT, THE COUNCIL, THE EUROPEAN ECONOMIC AND SOCIAL COMMITTEE AND THE COMMITTEE OF THE REGIONS EU Action Plan against Wildlife Trafficking SWD 2016 38 final   2. COMMUNICATION FROM THE COMMISSION TO THE EUROPEAN PARLIAMENT, THE COUNCIL, THE EUROPEAN ECONOMIC AND SOCIAL COMMITTEE AND THE COMMITTEE OF THE REGIONS EU Action Plan against Wildlife Trafficking   3. 1. Setting the scene Wildlife trafficking1 has become one of the world s most profitable organised crimes. The exact scale is difficult to quantify, but different sources2 estimate the profits from such trafficking at between EUR 8 and EUR 20 billion annually. It covers a broad range of protected species, including elephants and rhinos, corals, pangolins, tigers and great apes. A growing problem worldwide The illicit ivory trade has more than doubled since 2007, and is over three times greater than it was in 1998. Between 2007 and 2013, rhino poaching increased by 7000 in South Africa, endangering the very survival of this species3. More than 4000 tonnes of highly endangered rosewood suspected to have been illegally exported from Madagascar were seized by the authorities in various transit and destination countries between November 2013 and April 2014 alone. The EU has an important role to play in tackling this traffic, as Europe is currently a destination market and a hub for trafficking in transit to other regions. It is also a region from which certain species are sourced for illegal trade. In recent years, Member States have reported, in particular, seizures of ivory and rhino horns in transit and illegal imports of live reptiles and exotic birds, while several tonnes of highly endangered eels from the EU have been illegally sold to Asia. with major implications for the rule of law, crime and security Wildlife trafficking has a devastating impact on biodiversity, threatening to eradicate some species. Moreover, it both creates incentives for corrupt practices and is enabled by them, thereby undermining the rule of law. Notably in some regions in Africa, it has a very negative impact on the potential for economic development4. Wildlife trafficking is very attractive to criminals, as it is highly lucrative and, in most countries, a low enforcement priority by comparison with other forms of trafficking, so the risk of detection and penalties is very limited. Links with money laundering and other forms of organised crime, such as trafficking in drugs and firearms, have been regularly reported5. The UN Security Council has acknowledged that wildlife trafficking in Central Africa is fuelling conflicts and threatening regional and national security by providing a source of funding to militia groups6. A higher international profile 1 Defined as international and non international illegal trade in wild animals and plants and derived products, and closely interlinked offences such as poaching. 2 3 The Staff Working Document accompanying this Communication SWD 2016 38 shows in greater detail the scale of wildlife trafficking worldwide and the EU s role in the illegal trade. 4 See SWD 2016 38 5 See SWD 2016 38 6 Resolution 2134 2014 and 2136 2014 Report of the Secretary General on the situation in Central Africa and the activities of the United Nations Regional Office for Central Africa , 30 November 2015   4. Attention to wildlife trafficking at the international political level has grown in recent years, given the surge in its scale and impact. The UN General Assembly adopted the first resolution on this specific subject, which was co sponsored by all EU Member States, in July 20157. The issue was also specifically addressed at other recent important international events, such as a high level conference held in Kasane, Botswana in March 20158, and the G7 Summit in June 20159. As a result, joint commitments were made by the international community, including the EU and its Member States, to step up anti trafficking action. Numerous measures to combat wildlife trafficking have been adopted under the Convention on International Trade in Endangered Species CITES , a key international treaty regulating the international trade in wildlife, to which the EU became a party in 2015. The United States have set up a Presidential Task Force and adopted a national strategy against wildlife trafficking. Key market countries such as China are showing increased engagement, notably through stronger enforcement efforts, and the will to cooperate more closely with the EU on these issues. The African Union has started implementing a continent wide strategy. which needs to be translated into action on the ground The EU has already shown leadership in tackling the illegal trade in natural resources by adopting ambitious policies on timber and fishery products. This EU Action Plan demonstrates that the EU is ready to live up to international expectations and commitments, and that it is raising the level of its ambition as regards action against the illegal trade in wildlife. This will also help to ensure that the significant investments made over the last decades through EU development support for wildlife conservation worldwide will not be undermined through criminal activities. The Action Plan is a major contribution towards the Sustainable Development Goals set under the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable Development agreed by heads of state at a UN summit in September 2015. Goal 15, which relates to biodiversity, sets the target of tak ing urgent action to end poaching and trafficking of protected species of flora and fauna, and address ing both demand and supply of illegal wildlife products 10. The European Parliament called for an Action Plan in a resolution adopted in January 201411. An EU Action Plan has also been supported by many EU Member States, international organisations, NGOs, and concerned businesses at a stakeholder consultation on the EU approach against wildlife trafficking, launched by the European Commission in February 201412. The EU and its Member States need to address the problem together. EU wide rules regulating the trade in wildlife have been in place in all Member States since 198313, 7 Resolution 69 314 8 150325.pdf 9 eng_en.pdf __blob publicationFile v 3, p. 11. 10 Target 15.7. 11 Cf. European Parliament Resolution of 15 January 2014 2013 2747 RSP . 12 See COM 2014 64 and SWD 2014 347. 13 Council Regulation EC 338 97.   5. implementing CITES, and the Commission issued a recommendation on enforcement in 200714. However, reports15 reveal significant differences in how the Member States implement and enforce these shared rules. This represents a major risk criminals can easily exploit this state of affairs by diverting trade routes accordingly, as a number of cases in recent years have shown. It has also emerged, in various reports and during the stakeholder consultation, that lack of awareness and political engagement are also major obstacles to combating wildlife trafficking effectively. A joint commitment by the EU and its Member States, in the form of an Action Plan, to taking a series of measures, implementing shared international commitments and acknowledging at a political level the importance of tackling the problem, represents a way to ensure more even EU wide enforcement. It will help boost the EU s credibility worldwide when it demands that its global partners take stronger action against wildlife trafficking. In implementing this Action Plan, it will be essential to work together closely with stakeholders, including civil society organisations and relevant business sectors, on many specific measures to make maximum use of the available expertise and knowledge and ensure maximum impact. 2. The components of the Action Plan The EU Action Plan comprises a series of measures to be taken by EU institutions and or Member States. These are set out in the Annex to this communication. Clearly, sufficient finance and human resources will be needed to support these measures. This Action Plan provides the impetus and framework for making better use of existing EU resources. The measures are essentially designed to improve cooperation between all the players concerned, make more effective use of existing tools and policies, and strengthen synergies between them, so that wildlife trafficking can be better tackled across the EU and globally. The measures, which are designed to address a complex problem holistically by involving all relevant organisations, are based on three priorities 1 preventing wildlife trafficking and addressing its root causes, 2 implementing and enforcing existing rules and combating organised wildlife crime more effectively, and 3 strengthening the global partnership of source, consumer and transit countries against wildlife trafficking. The objectives and related actions under each priority are detailed in the table in the Annex. Priority 1 Preventing wildlife trafficking and addressing its root causes Efforts will be made to reduce the demand for and the supply of illegal wildlife products, both within the EU and globally, by using the available multilateral CITES and EU specific tools, supporting specific campaigns and further limiting ivory trade within and from the EU Objective 1.1 see the table in the Annex . One important way to tackle the root causes of 14 OJ L 159, 20.6.2007, p. 45 47 15 See SWD 2016 38   6. wildlife trafficking is to ensure that rural communities in source countries are more engaged in wildlife conservation, and that they benefit more from it Objective 1.2 . Engaging more actively with relevant business sectors, ranging from those active in wildlife trade or using wildlife products to those that provide services to the trade, is another focus area. This reflects EU commitment to the responsible management of global supply chains16 Objective 1.3 . Finally, multilateral and bilateral measures will be taken to tackle corruption, a crucial enabling factor for wildlife trafficking throughout the enforcement chain Objective 1.4 . Priority 2 Implementing and enforcing existing rules and combating organised wildlife crime more effectively Although existing international and EU rules on the wildlife trade are appropriate overall, numerous studies and reports reveal17 significant difficulties with implementing and enforcing them. This is particularly true of the relatively new phenomenon of organised wildlife crime. A review of shortcomings in implementation is to be conducted for all Member States, and strategies for tackling them are to be developed, to ensure that existing rules are enforced more consistently across the EU Objective 2.1 . Setting enforcement priorities jointly and having Europol and Eurojust provide dedicated support for cross border cases will help make checks and enforcement more strategic in nature. In line with the EU Agenda on Security, a review will be started in 2016 to assess whether the current EU legislative framework for tackling environmental crime, particularly organised wildlife crime, is fit for purpose. The purpose of Objective 2.2 is to boost the capacity of all links in the enforcement chain and the judiciary to take effective action against wildlife trafficking in the EU. This requires national action to improve inter agency cooperation and coordination, communication and data flow by sharing best practice at EU level. The knowledge base on wildlife trafficking cases needs to be improved, and training is essential. Fighting organised crime more effectively Objective 2.3 in the area of wildlife trafficking requires targeted awareness raising amongst specialists on organised crime, cybercrime and money laundering. In addition, all Member States must implement the international commitments they have made, to ensure that their laws on organised crime cover wildlife trafficking and that appropriate penalties can be imposed for trafficking. Finally, international cooperation on enforcement is to be improved Objective 2.4 through participation in international law enforcement operations, technical assistance and targeted financial support. Priority 3 Strengthening the global partnership of source, consumer and transit countries against wildlife trafficking Various measures will be taken to step up funding to support developing countries in their efforts to combat wildlife trafficking, make support more effective and use it more strategically. This will be done through comprehensive needs assessments and by coordinating support more effectively with other donors Objective 3.1 . To strengthen the 16 See COM 2015 497, Trade for all towards a more responsible trade and investment policy 17 See SWD 2016 38   7. global partnership against wildlife trafficking, the diplomatic tools of the EU and its Member States and other tools, notably EU trade policy, must be used more effectively in relations with key source, transit and consumer countries and relevant regional organisations Objective 3.2 . Better tools must be developed to tackle the links between wildlife trafficking and security that exist in some regions Objective 3.3 . Finally, the existing multilateral processes, in international agreements and fora, must be used to keep the issue on the global agenda, maintain political commitment and monitor the implementation of commitments. The next CITES Conference of the Parties in September 2016 will be particularly important for this purpose Objective 3.4 . 3. Monitoring and evaluation The Action Plan covers the five years from 2016 to 2020. The table in the Annex assigns each measure to an EU actor the Commission services, the EEAS, Europol, Eurojust and or Member States and sets out a timeline for implementing them. The Commission services and the EEAS will establish a scoreboard to monitor implementation. The EU Wildlife Trade Enforcement Group set up under Regulation EC 338 97 and consisting of representatives of EU Member States enforcement authorities is to review progress twice a year. The Commission will report to the Council and the European Parliament by July 2018 on progress in implementing the Action Plan, and on whether its priorities and objectives are appropriate and relevant. Progress made and the success of the Action Plan in curbing wildlife trafficking will be evaluated in 2020. On that basis, the Commission will consider what further action is needed. An Inter Service Group within the Commission will coordinate activities across the areas concerned and ensure that all relevant Commission services and the EEAS perform their allotted tasks. 4. Links with other EU initiatives and policies The Action Plan will supersede Commission Recommendation No 2007 425 EC identifying a set of actions for the enforcement of Regulation EC No 338 97 on the protection of species of wild fauna and flora by regulating trade therein. The Action Plan will be implemented in such a way as to ensure consistency with existing EU policies with a bearing on the illegal trade in natural resources. These include the EU Action Plan on Forest Law Enforcement, Governance and Trade FLEGT the EU policy against Illegal, Unreported and Unregulated IUU fishing and EU initiatives against trafficking in waste, drugs, counterfeit goods, firearms or human beings, money laundering and illicit financial flows.   8. ANNEX Table of actions Priority I Preventing wildlife trafficking and addressing its root causes Actions Responsi ble Expected results Timeline Objective 1.1 Reduce the demand for and supply of illegal wildlife products 1. Increase support for awareness raising and targeted demand reduction campaigns in the EU and worldwide COM HRVP18 MS Action taken and funding provided to raise awareness and reduce demand for illegal wildlife products in important non EU countries and within the EU, notably for species illegally traded in large numbers within the EU Continuous, with first milestone at the end of 2016 COM MS Existing awareness raising tools and materials shared among the Member States End of 2016 2. Further limit trade in ivory within and from the EU COM Commission guidelines issued to ensure uniform interpretation of EU rules with the aim to suspend the export of raw pre Convention ivory and guarantee that only legal ancient ivory items are traded in the EU End of 2016 MS Member States do not issue export and re export documents for raw pre Convention ivory Member States only issue intra EU trade certificates for ancient ivory items on the basis of the criteria defined in the guidelines Continuous with first milestone at the end of 2016 3. Reduce or ban unsustainable imports into the EU of endangered species by proposing their listing in CITES Appendices e.g. rare reptile species COM New listing proposals submitted for consideration by Conferences of the Parties CoPs of CITES Continuous, with first milestone in April 2016 18 High Representative of the Union for Foreign Affairs Security Policy Vice President of the European Commission.   9. Actions Responsi ble Expected results Timeline Objective 1.2 Ensure that rural communities in source countries are engaged in and benefit from wildlife conservation 4. Strengthen engagement of rural communities in the management and conservation of wildlife COM MS The need for proper engagement of rural communities in the design and implementation of measures against wildlife trafficking is made a priority in relevant EU and Member States policies and funding Continuous, with first milestone at the end of 2016 5. Support the development of sustainable and alternative livelihoods for communities living in and adjacent to wildlife habitats COM HRVP MS Support to sustainable economic activities benefiting rural communities living in and adjacent to wildlife habitats is prioritised in EU and Member States policies on funding support for rural areas in source countries Continuous, with first milestone at the end of 2016 Objective 1.3 Increase business sector engagement in efforts to combat wildlife trafficking and encourage sustainable sourcing of wildlife products 6. Raise awareness of business sectors trading in wildlife products within from the EU or facilitating such trade COM Main players in wildlife trade related business sectors identified at EU level and regular communication channels on wildlife trade issues set up between them and the Commission End of 2016 COM Sessions of the EU Wildlife Trade Enforcement Group organised with business players to discuss specific issues e.g. Traditional Chinese Medicine, exotic pets, luxury industry, hunting tourism, transport, courier companies, online trade Continuous, with first milestone at the end of 2016 7. Support private sector initiatives to curb the illegal wildlife trade and encourage sustainable sourcing of wildlife products in from the EU COM MS Existing private led initiatives and private public partnerships supported and best practice shared to encourage new initiatives End of 2017 Objective 1.4 Tackle corruption associated with wildlife trafficking 8. Support initiatives to fight the corruption associated with wildlife trafficking at national, regional and international levels COM HRVP Wildlife trafficking included in EU policy and tools against corruption notably as part of dialogues with key third countries receiving budgetary support Continuous, with first milestone at the end of 2016   10. Actions Responsi ble Expected results Timeline COM HRVP MS Issue addressed in bilateral meetings with key partner countries and in relevant multilateral fora, including G7, G20, UN Convention against Corruption Continuous, with first milestone at the end of 2016 COM MS Relevant resolution proposal submitted for consideration by CITES 17th Conference of the Parties April 2016 Priority 2 Making implementation and enforcement of existing rules and the fight against organised wildlife crime more effective Actions Responsi ble Expected results Timeline Objective 2.1 Ensure more even implementation of EU rules on the wildlife trade and develop a more strategic approach to checks and the enforcement of rules against wildlife trafficking at EU level 9. Develop strategies to improve compliance with EU wildlife legislation at national level COM Shortcomings in implementing EU wildlife trade regulations in each Member State assessed by the Commission and recommendations put forward on how to improve these shortcomings End 2016 MS Recommendations implemented in the Member States 2017 COM Implementation of EU rules on importing hunting trophies in the EU proactively monitored, to ensure that such trophies are of legal and sustainable origin Continuous with first milestone at the end of 2016 10. Improve rate of detection of illegal activities MS In addition to the checks at border crossing points required under Regulation EC No 338 97, in country compliance monitoring and enforcement ensured, in particular through regular checks on traders and holders such as pet shops, breeders and nurseries Continuous with first milestone at the end of 2016   11. Actions Responsi ble Expected results Timeline 11. Step up efforts to ensure implementation of the EU roadmap towards eliminating the illegal killing, trapping and trade of birds also relevant under Priority 1 COM Funding provided for the Intergovernmental Task Force on the illegal killing of birds in the Mediterranean established under the Convention on Migratory Species and first meeting held Mid 2016 COM MS Action taken to improve national monitoring and enforcement of compliance Continuous with first milestone at the end of 2016 12. Define and assess priority risks regularly MS Enforcement priorities as regards target species and products such as eels, ivory, rhino horns, live reptiles and birds , trade routes and smuggling methods defined at national level Continuous with first milestone at the end of 2016 COM Europol MS Based on common risk based assessment of EU wide priorities agreed at the EU Wildlife Trade Enforcement Group, in cooperation with Europol Continuous with first milestone at the end of 2016 13. Improve cooperation among Member States on cases of cross border wildlife trafficking COM Europol Eurojust Sufficient resources earmarked in Europol and Eurojust for work on wildlife trafficking Continuous with first milestone at the end of 2016   12. Actions Responsi ble Expected results Timeline Europol Eurojust MS Regular joint operations involving cross border cooperation carried out by EU Member States facilitated by Europol Continuous with first milestone at the end of 2016 Europol Eurojust MS Joint Investigation Teams involving Europol and or Eurojust set up Continuous with first milestone at the end of 2016 14. Review the EU policy and legislative framework on environmental crime in line with the European Agenda on Security COM Effectiveness of Directive 2008 99 reviewed, including concerning the criminal sanctions applicable to wildlife trafficking throughout the EU 2016 Objective 2.2 Increase capacity to combat wildlife trafficking of all parts of the enforcement chain and the judiciary 15. Improve cooperation, coordination, communication and data flow between the enforcement agencies responsible in the Member States MS A coordination mechanism such as an inter agency task force and or Memorandum of Understanding between the relevant agencies customs, inspection services, police, CITES management and enforcement authorities is put in place in each Member State, and all the authorities with responsibility in this area have access to the relevant communication channels Mid 2017 MS Options for data exchange between the authorities responsible in this field under national legislation reviewed by Member States Mid 2017 COM MS Best practice for inter agency cooperation and the effective monitoring and enforcement of compliance in the MS is collected and shared at EU level through the EU Wildlife Trade Enforcement Group Continuous with first milestone at the end of 2016   13. Actions Responsi ble Expected results Timeline 16. Improve knowledge base on checks, investigations, prosecutions and judicial proceedings against wildlife trafficking MS More systematic provision by Member States to the Commission of relevant qualitative and statistical data, including data on checks, investigations, seizures, prosecution cases and judgments, including the penalties imposed, and systematic information to Europol about all cases with organised crime and or cross border implications Continuous with first milestone at the end of 2016 COM MS Data collection methodology in the field of wildlife trafficking streamlined throughout the EU and awareness raised in relevant expert groups on crime statistics Continuous with first milestone at the end of 2016 COM ENPE Database containing case law on wildlife trafficking from Member States established at ENPE19 to facilitate knowledge sharing Mid 2017 17. Step up training for all parts of the enforcement chain, including joint training activities COM Training on wildlife trafficking is included in the programme of EU training institutions such as CEPOL, ERA and others Continuous with first milestone at the end of 2016 COM MS Existing training material is compiled and shared within the EU End of 2016 COM Training against wildlife trafficking eligible for funding support under the various relevant EU financial instruments LIFE, Internal Security Fund, etc. Continuous with first milestone at the end of 2016 MS Training is regularly given in Member States for the entire enforcement judiciary chain, including joint training sessions bringing together relevant enforcement agencies, prosecutors Continuous with first milestone at 19 European Network of Prosecutors for the Environment   14. Actions Responsi ble Expected results Timeline and judges the end of 2016 18. Strengthen or, where applicable, establish practitioner networks at national and regional level, and improve cooperation between them MS Establishment of relevant national networks supported in each Member State Mid 2017 COM Joint meetings of relevant EU networks20 organised Continuous with first milestone at the end of 2016 19. Improve care of seized or confiscated live animals or plants MS Facilities are available in all Member States for temporary care of seized or confiscated live specimens, and mechanisms are in place for long term rehoming, where necessary. Assistance is provided to other Member States. Continuous with first milestone at the end of 2016 Objective 2.3 Fight organised wildlife crime more effectively 20. Regularly assess the threat posed by organised wildlife trafficking in the EU Europol Serious and Organised Crime Threat Assessments SOCTAs include assessment of wildlife trafficking threat, based on data and, where possible, national threat assessments provided by Member States Continuous with first milestone in the first half of 2017 21. Boost capacity of relevant experts to tackle the links of wildlife trafficking with organised crime, including cybercrime and related illicit financial flows COM MS Awareness raising activities conducted in relevant fora REFCO Network of Prosecutors specialised on organised crime, national organised crime, cybercrime and financial investigation units Continuous with first milestone at the end of 2016 MS Capacity built to tackle online wildlife trafficking within competent units and ensured that channels exist to trigger assistance from units specialised in cybercrime in specific cases e.g. darkweb investigations, abuse of virtual Continuous with first milestone at the end of 20 Such as EU Wildlife Trade Enforcement Group, European Network of Prosecutors for the Environment ENPE, European Forum of Judges for the Environment EUFJE, IMPEL, Project Group for the Coordination of activities on the protection of Health, Cultural Heritage and the Environment PARCS, EnviCrimeNet.   15. Actions Responsi ble Expected results Timeline currencies . 2016 COM MS Issue put on the agenda of the FATF21, of CARIN22 and of the Egmont Group of Financial Intelligence Units End of 2016 COM MS FATF requested to prepare guidance on links between money laundering and wildlife trafficking End of 2016 MS Training on investigations into illicit financial flows related to wildlife trafficking organised Continuous with first milestone at the end of 2016 22. Member States ensure, in line with international commitments made, that organised wildlife trafficking constitutes throughout the EU a serious crime under the UN Convention against Transnational Organized Crime, i.e. that it is punishable by imprisonment of a maximum of at least four years MS Relevant national legislation reviewed, and where necessary amended End of 2017 23. Member States review, in line with UNGA Resolution, national legislation on money laundering to ensure that offences connected to wildlife trafficking can be treated as predicate offences and are actionable under domestic proceeds of crime legislation MS Relevant national legislation reviewed, and where necessary amended End of 2017 21 Financial Action Task Force 22 Camden Assets Recovery Interagency Network   16. Actions Responsi ble Expected results Timeline Objective 2.4 Improve international cooperation on enforcement against wildlife trafficking 24. Step up cooperation on enforcement between the Member States and EU enforcement actors and key non EU countries and other regional Wildlife Enforcement Networks, relevant global networks International Consortium for Combating Wildlife Trafficking, ICCWC23, and the International Network for Environmental Compliance and Enforcement, INECE COM Europol Joint meetings held involving Europol, the EU Wildlife Trade Enforcement Group and relevant regional enforcement networks e.g. ASEAN WEN and Lusaka Agreement Task Force and the INECE. Continuous with first milestone at the end of 2016 COM Best practice in enforcement cooperation shared End 2016 MS Europol Member States, assisted by Europol, participate in joint international law enforcement operations Continuous with first milestone at the end of 2016 25. Support capacity building for law enforcement in key source and market countries, including enforcement within protected sites COM HRVP MS Continued funding support provided for ICCWC activities, including evaluations of enforcement systems based on the ICCWC wildlife and forest crime Toolkit Continuous with first milestone at the end of 2016 COM HRVP MS Results of ICCWC Toolkit recommendations taken into account in targeted support to third countries Continuous with first milestone at the end of 2016 23 Comprising Interpol, the CITES Secretariat, the World Customs Organisation, UNODC and the World Bank.   17. Priority 3 Strengthening the global partnership of source, consumer and transit countries against wildlife trafficking Actions Responsi ble Expected results Timeline Objective 3.1 Provide increased, more effective and more strategically focused support to developing countries 26. Ensure that wildlife trafficking is considered for EU funding under relevant programmes in the areas of natural resources management, environment, organised crime, security and governance COM HRVP Strategic Approach for Wildlife Conservation in Africa 24 serves as a basis for programming relevant development support Further regional or thematic strategic approaches are developed Development cooperation funding streams, including the European Development Fund EDF , the Development Cooperation Instrument DCI , the Instrument contributing to Stability and Peace, and other financial instruments such as the Partnership Instrument, are mobilised against wildlife trafficking, within the agreed financial envelopes of the contributing programs, and other possible funding sources are explored Continuous with first milestone at the end of 2016 27. Increase effectiveness of funding support against wildlife trafficking COM HRVP MS Regular meetings held in key countries to coordinate donor activities Beneficiary countries asked to report on how the measures against wildlife trafficking funded by the EU have been effective in addressing the problem using indicators such as the number of seizures and successful prosecutions Continuous with first milestone at the end of 2016 Objective 3.2 Strengthen and coordinate better action against wildlife 28. Step up dialogue with key source, transit and market countries, including dialogue with local communities, civil society and the private sector COM HRVP MS Priority countries identified Specific dialogue and technical cooperation structures established Continuous with first milestone at the end of 2016 24 Larger than elephants Inputs for an EU strategic approach to wildlife conservation in Africa Synthesis, Publications Office of the European Union, 2015   18. Actions Responsi ble Expected results Timeline trafficking and its root causes with relevant source, transit and market countries Topic systematically included in the agenda of political and sectorial dialogues and of high level meetings with key non EU countries or regions HRVP MS Network of focal points in delegations and embassies in relevant countries set up, making use, where appropriate, of existing structures such as the Green Diplomacy Network End of 2016 29. Use EU trade policies and instruments proactively to support action against wildlife trafficking COM HRVP Ambitious commitments to combat wildlife trafficking proposed by the EU for inclusion in future Free Trade Agreements FTAs e.g. with Japan and the USA Trans Atlantic Trade and Investment Partnership TTIP Proactive monitoring of the implementation of commitments associated with wildlife trafficking included in existing FTAs and the GSP regime Wildlife trafficking included on the agenda of EU bilateral trade dialogues with key partners and of the WTO Committee on Trade and Environment Continuous with first milestone at the end of 2016 30. Strengthen cooperation against wildlife trafficking with relevant regional organisations, such as the African Union, SADC, the East African Community, ASEAN, and in relevant multilateral fora, such as ASEM COM HRVP Topic included regularly on the agenda of high level meetings Continuous with first milestone at the end of 2016 Objective 3.3 Address security dimension of wildlife trafficking 31. Improve knowledge base and develop strategies to tackle the links between wildlife trafficking and security COM HRVP Study launched to improve knowledge base on links between wildlife trafficking and other forms of organised crime and financing for militias or terrorist groups. Mid 2016 COM HRVP Based on the results, next steps agreed in relevant EU fora Mid 2017   19. Actions Responsi ble Expected results Timeline MS COM HRVP MS Security dimension of wildlife trafficking considered in overall EU situational assessments for relevant non EU countries End of 2016 HRVP MS UN EU cooperation on the illegal wildlife trade in the context of peacekeeping and crisis management stepped up Continuous with first milestone at the end of 2016 Objective 3.4 Strengthen multilateral efforts to combat wildlife trafficking 32. Support the adoption and implementation of strong decisions, resolutions and political declarations on wildlife trafficking in international instruments and multilateral fora COM HRVP MS Issue addressed under CITES including, where necessary, through support for trade sanctions in cases of non compliance Convention on Migratory Species Tunis Action Plan 2013 2020 on the eradication of illegal killing, trapping and trade of wild birds under the Berne Convention on the Conservation of European Wildlife and Natural Habitats Relevant multilateral initiatives at global level UN, London and Kasane follow up processes, G7, G20 etc. Implementation of commitments made in these fora regularly monitored by the EU and its Member States Continuous with first milestone at the end of 2016 